Chapter Five 

 

 

 The commander of the rider squad stopped his horse, removed his helmet and stroked his thin, 
sweaty hair. 

 'End of the road' he announced, looking at the bard's inquiring look. 

 'Heh? How is that?' wondered Dandelion. 'Why?' 

 'We dont go further. Look, down there is the stream, that is the Ribbon. Our task was to escort you 
only to the Ribbon. That means its time to bid farewell.' 

 The rest of the squad stopped behind them, but none of the riders dismounted.. All of them were 
looking worriedly at all directions. Dandelion stood up in his stirrups and put his hand over his eyes. 

 'Where do you see a river?' 

 'I told you, that it is down there. Go down, you will see it immediately.' 

 'Escort me to the shore at least,' insisted Dandelion, 'To the nearest ford.....' 

 'You will find you ford alone. It didnt rain since may. The water is low, the ford is shallow. On the 
horse you will get through anywhere you like' 

 'I showed your governor a letter of safe-conduct from king Venzlav' objected the bard. 'The 
governor read the kings orders and I heard with my own ears, how he told you to escort me to 
Brokilon. And you want to abandon me in this spinney? What if I get lost?' 

 'You wont' growled grimly the second rider, that stood next to them, but did not talk until now. 
'You wont have enough time to get lost. A arrow of some nymph will find you first.' 

 'You are a band of frightened rabbits.' said Dandelion snidely. 'You fear woman. Brokilon is on 
the other side of the Ribbon after all. The river is the border. We havent crossed it yet.' 

 'Their border' explained the commander and constantly looked around 'is where their arrows 
reach. From the forest an arrow can reach the shore like nothing. And it will still be fast enough to 
pierce chainmail. You insisted on going to Brokilon, your business, your hide. But I want to live, 
I wont go further. I could just as well stick my head in a hornets nest!' 

 'I explained to you' the bard put his hat on and straightened up in his saddle 'that I go to Brokilon 
with a message. I am a royal ambassador, so to speak. I'm not afraid of dryads. But I ask you to escort 
me to the shore of the Ribbon. In case some footpads attacked me in the spinney.' 

 The second rider, the grim one, forced a smile: 

 'Footpads? Here? During the day? Sir, you wont meet a living soul here. These days the nymphs 
shoot everyone who appears near the shore, and sometimes they raid deep into our territories. Dont be 
afraid of footpads here.' 

 'He is right,' confirmed the commander 'You wont find an idiot among the footpads who would 
wait on the shore of the Ribbon. We are not idiots either. You will go alone, without a weapon, 


without armor, even a mile away everyone will see you are no soldier. Perhaps you will get lucky. But 
if a nymph sees us, armed riders, we wont have enough time to run from their arrows.' 

 'Good advice' noted Dandelion. The patted his horse on the neck and looked at the path ahead of 
him. 'I will go alone. Farewell soldiers. Thank you for your escort.' 

 'Dont be in such a hurry to leave' said the grim raider and looked at the sky.'The evening draws 
near. Go when the fog appears above the river. So that, you know.....' 

 'What ?' 

 'You cant aim as good in the fog. If you have luck, a nymph could miss you. But their bows, dear 
sir, only miss rarely.' 

 'I said...' 

 'You said, you said, I heard you. You are travelling with a message. But I say, message or not, they 
don't care. They will release and arrow and thats it. 

 'You decided that you will scare me?' asked the poet. 'Who do you think I am? A city bookworm? 
I, dear soldiers, saw more battlefields than all of you together. I also know something about dryads, 
for example, that they dont shoot without a warning. 

 'That was long ago' said the commander bitterly. 'Those times are gone. Long ago they shot at 
trees or at the ground. It meant, here is the arrow, here is the border – and not a step further. If a man 
then immediately returned, he could have saved himself. But that changed, now they only shoot to 
kill.' 

 'Since when is it like that ?' 

 'You know it is like this.' explained the soldier. 'When the kings signed the peace treaty with 
Nilfgaard, they attacked the elven groups without mercy. They attack them from all sides, there is not 
a night when some of them don't run through Brugge to search for safety in Brokilon. And when our 
people hunt the elves, they almost always run into the nymphs that are going to help the elves. 
Sometimes our soldiers cant control themselves... do you understand ?' 

 'I understand' Dandelion looked at the commanders face and nodded. 'While hunting the 
Scoia'teal you went through the Ribbon and killed dryads. And they are paying you back right now. 
War ?' 

 'Exactly. War. Now it is a war to the death, no one survives anymore. The hatred between us can't 
be forgotten anymore. I advise you for the last time: if you don't have to, don't go there.' 

 Dandelion swallowed hard. 

 'The problem is' he said with a fighting voice and posture, which took a lot of effort, 'that I have to 
go. And I will. Evening or not, fog or not, I have to go, when duty calls.' 

 'The years of training showed their worth, the bards trained voice sounded resonant and powerful, 
firm and confident, like steel. The soldiers looked at him with honest admiration. 

 'Before you go' said the commander and pulled out a wooded field flask 'drink some spirit, sir 
singer. Have a swig....' 

 'Dying will feel better,' added the grim second rider. 

 The poet drank. 

 'A coward, before he dies' he said once he coughed and got his breath back, 'dies a hundred times, 
a brave man tastes death only once. The Lucky Lady likes fearless man, she despises cowards.' 

 The riders looked at him with the highest admiration. They could not have known that Dandelion 
recited the words of a rich epos. Written by someone else even. 


 'Before I forget' the poet took out a leather pouch. ' I will reward you for your escort. Before you 
return to the outpost, before the stern mother duty calls you again, stop in an inn on the way and drink 
on my health.' 

 'Thank you sir,' the comander flushed 'You are generous, even when we...... Forgive us that we 
abandon you but..' 

 'It is nothing. Good luck' 

 The bard adjusted his hat over his left ear, kicked the horse with his heel and went down to the 
river. On the way the whistled the melody of 'Weddings in Bullerlyn', well known and quite rude 
drinking songs. 

 'In the outpost, they told us' he heard the words of the grim one, 'that he is a waste of food, 
braggart and coward. But he is a brave and valiant man.' 

 'You are right' agreed the commander. 'He is not afraid, we must give him that. He didnt even 
look back, I was looking at him. You hear that ? He is even whistling. Ho, hoo. Did you hear what he 
said ? That he is and ambaras. The king doesnt make anyone an ambaras. You have to be a special 
footman to be made an ambaras....' 

 Dandelion spurred his horse to get away as fast as possible. He didnt want to ruin the impression 
that he made with so much effort. But he knew that fear dried his throat and he couldnt whistle much 
longer. 

 The road was shady and damp, wet clay and a carpet of leaves muffled the hooves of the brown 
gelding, who the poet named Pegas. Pegas walked slowly and with a drooping head. He was one of 
the not so numerous horses, that didnt care about anything. 

 The forest ended, but on the way to the shore he had to go through a meadow. The poet stopped his 
horse. He looked carefully around, but did not see anything suspicous. He strained his ears, but heard 
only a concert of toads. 

 'So horsie,' he cleared his throat. 'Onwards.' 

 Pegas lifted his head a little and slowly lifted his usually drooping ears. 

 'You heard right. Onwards!' 


The gelding idly walked forward, mud clucking under its hooves. Toads jumped to escape its feet. 
A few steps ahead of them, a scared duck honked and flew off. The bard's heart stopped for 
a moment, then it started to beat wildly somewhere in his neck. Pegas paid no attention. 

 'A hero went on....' muttered Dandelion, took out a scarf from his sleeve and wiped the cold sweat 
from his scruff. 'Without fear, he walked through the dangerous swamp, and didnt get appaled by by 
the jumping reptiles nor by flying dragons... he went on and on... until he arrived near the 
immeasurable level of water...' 

 Pegas snorted and stopped. They were at the shore, standing in reed and cattail as high as the 
callipers. The bard wiped his sweaty forehead again, then tied the scarf around his neck. We looked at 
the thick alder on the opposite shore so long and intensely, that his eyes started to weep. But he did 
not see anything or anyone. Over the slow current of the river, he saw swarms of small insects. The 
surface was filled with spreading circles, caused by fish grabbing their prey. Around the shore, a cyan-
orange kingfisher looped around. 

 Everywhere one could see the results of beaver work, nibbled branches, gnawed tree trunks washed 
by water. There are beavers here, he thought, an extraordinary lot. No surprise, there is no one to scare 
the hard working woodgnawers. No woodcutters, bandits or hunters that lay traps here. Those, who 
tried were hit by an arrow and the crayfish ate them as they fell into the muddy shore. And I, fool, am 
going here by my own choice. This is the Ribbon, the river above which a deathly stench hangs, one 
that not even the smell of calamus and mint can suppress... 

 He sighed. 

 Pegas entered the water with his front hooves, dipped his head and drank for a long time. Then he 
lifted it and looked at his rider. Water dripped from his mouth and nostrils. The poet nodded his head, 
sighed again and loudly sucked his nose. 

 'The hero looked at the rough current,' he said silently and tried not to chatter his teeth. 'Then he 
ventured onwards, for his heart knew no fear'. 

 Pegas hung his head and ears. 

 'Knew no fear I said!' 

 The horse shook his head, the steel rings on his bits and halter rang. Dandelion kicked him. The 
gelding walked into the water, with obvious indifference. 

 The river was shallow, but thicky overgrown. Until they reached the middle of the riverbed, Pegas 
dragged long offshoots with his feet. The animal walked slowly, and tried to shake the vegetation, 
that hindered his movement, off his hooves with every step. 

 The reed and alder of the opposite shore were close now. So close that Dandelion could feel his 
stomach descending down into his pants. He realized, that in the middle of the river, confined by the 
vegetation, he was a very easy target, one that could not be missed. In his mind, he already saw the 
curved arches of bows, the stretching strings, and the sharp tips pointing at his stomach, chest, throat. 

 He pushed the horses sides with his legs, but Pegas did not move. Instead of speeding up, he 
stopped and lifted his tail. The horse donuts loudly splashed into the water. Dandelion yelped, 
shocked. 

 'The hero could not go through the roaring cascade,' he yelped with closed eyes. 'He died a brave 
death, hit by countless arrows. He was forever swallowed by the shadowy pool, dead in the embrace 
of weeds as green as nefrit, and all of his remains disappeared.... the current only carried horse shit to 
the sea.' 

 Pegas, who was obviously relieved, walked on without exhortation to the shore and on the shallow, 
without the annoying offroots, he even mischievously jumped so the poets boots and pants were 
completely wet. Dandelion didnt even notice, the vision of arrows pointing at his chest could not be 
banished and fear crawled up his spine like a big, cold , slimy leech. Because barely a hundred steps 
behind the alder, behind the green field of alloys, towered a black, innacessible, threatening forest 
wall. 

 Brokilon. 

 A few steps away from the shore, he encoutered a skeleton of a horse. Stalks of cattail grew through 
the ribcage.There were also a few, smaller bones. They did not look like horse bones. Dandelion 
shuddered and looked away. 


 The gelding walked through the muddy shore with a lot of squelching and smacking. The mud 
stank. The toads were silent for a while, the Ribbon grew silent. Dandelion closed his eyes. He did not 
say anything, did not improvize. Inspiration disappeared somewhere far away. Only the feeling of ice 
cold fear remained, a feeling very strong, but thoroughly non-creative. 

 Pegas walked calmly to the edge of the dryad forest, which was called by many the forest of death. 

 I crossed the border, the poet thought. Now everything will be decided. Until I walked out from the 
water, they could have been generous. Not anymore. Now I am an intruder. Like that one... My 
skeleton can remain here too – a warning to those who would dare follow me... If the dryads are 
here... If they are observing me... 

 He thought of all the archery competitions and tournaments that he saw, the straw targets and 
figurines pierced or torn to bits by arrows. What would a man hit by an arrow feel? The hit ? Pain ? 
Or... nothing ? 

 The dryads were either not in the area, or did not decide what they should do against a lone rider, 
because the poet arrived to the forest, stiff with fear, but alive and healthy and in one piece. He could 
not get under the trees through the overgrown, with roots and branches ruffled barrier, he did not want 
to do enter the depths of the forest anyway. He forced himself to a risk – but not suicide. 

 He dismounted very slowly and bound his horse to a root sticking upwards. Usually he did not do 
it, for Pegas did not usually go away from his owner, but he did not know how the horse would react 
to the sounds of flying arrows. Until now, it never crossed his mind to subject himself or his mount to 
such sounds. 

 From his saddle, he took his lute – an unique, beautiful instrument, with a slim fingerboard. A gift 
from an elf, he though, as he stroked the inlaid wood. It could be that it would return the the Elder 
races...... If the dryads would not leave the lute at the corpse of its owner. 

 Close to him was a big uprooted tree trunk. The poet sat on it, leaned the lute on his leg, licked his 
lips and put his sweaty hands on his pants. 

 The sun was setting. Above the Ribbon rose haze, a whitish cover that spread as far as to the 
meadows near the shore. The air grew colder. Above his head he heard a flock of cranes fly, he heard 
their call. It disappeared into the distance, only the squawking of the toads remained. 

 Dandelion picked the strings. Once, then a second time, then a third. He twisted the pins, tuned the 
instrument and began to play. After a moment he began to sing too: 

 

Yviss, m'evelienn vente cáelm en tell 

Elaine Ettariel Aep cor me lode deith ess'viell 

Yn blathque me darienn Aen minne vain tegen a me 

Yn toin av muireánn que dis eveigh e aep llea... 

 

 The sun disappeared behind the forest. In the shadow of the old giants of Brokilon, it grew dark 
quickly. 

 

 L'eassan Lamm feainne renn, ess'ell 

Elaine Ettariel 

Aep cor... 

 

 He did not hear them. He felt their presence. 

 'N'te mire daetre. Sh'aente vort.' 

 'Dont shoot...' he whispered and obeying, her order he did not turn around. 'N'aen aespar a me... 
I come in peace...' 

 'N'ess a tearth. Sh'aente.' 

 He obeyed, but his fingers stiffened on the strings and his voice came out from his throat only with 
difficulty. But in the voice of the dryad there was no animosity and he, for fuck's sake, was no 
amateur. 

 

 L'eassan Lamm feainne renn, ess'ell. 


 Ellaine Ettariel 

 Aep cor aen tedd teviel e gwen 

 Yn blath que me darienn 

 Ess yn e evellien a me 

 Que shaent te cáelm a'vean minne me striscea... 

 

 This time he dared look over his shoulder. That what crouched near the big trunk near him looked 
like ivy shrub. But it was no shrub – shrubs dont have large bright eyes. 

 Pegas silently snorted and Dandelion knew that somehere in the darkness behind him, someone is 
stroking his horse's nostrils. 

 'Sh'aente vort,' asked the dryad, that was crouching behind him again. Her voice sounded like rain 
falling on leaves. 

 'I..' he bagan. 'I am.... I am a friend of witcher Geralt. I know that Geralt.. That Gwynbleidd is 
with you, here in Brokilon. I come...' 

 'N'te dice'en. Sh'aente va.' 

 'Sh'aent.' asked warmly the second dryad, one voice with the third. Perhaps with a fourth even, he 
was not sure. 

 'Yea, sh'aente taedh,' said with a silvery girly voice that, what he though a moment ago was 
a birch, rising a few steps away from him. 'Ess'laine.... Taedh. Sing.. More about Ettariel.... Yes ? 

 He obeyed: 

 

 Loving you is the goal of my life. 

Graceful Ettariel 

Allow me to keep the treasure of my memories 

And the magic flower 

The pledge and symbol of your love 

Most with dew like silver tears... 

 

 This time he heard steps. 

 'Dandelion.' 

 'Geralt!' 

 'Yes, it is me. You can stop that noise now.' 

 

*** 

 

 'How did you find me ?' Where did you learn that I am in Brokilon ?' 

 'From Triss Merigold... Dammit!' Dandelion tripped and would have fallen if the dryad walking 
next to him would not catch him skilfully. She was surprisingly strong, despite her small body. 

 'Gar'ean táedh,' she warned him. 'Va cáelm.' 

 'Thank you. It is terribly dark... Geralt ? Where are you ?' 

 'Here. Dont fall behind.' 

 Dandelion sped up, tripped again and hit the witcher, who stopped in the darkness in front of him. 
The dryads walked past them without even a slightest sound. 

 'Damn this darkness. How much longer will we walk ?' 

 'Not much. The camp is a bit farther. Who except Triss knows I am here ? Did you tell anyone ?' 

 'I had to tell King Venzlav. I needed his letter of safe-passage to travel through Brugge. Nowadays 
it is – a waste of words.... I needed permission to travel to Brokilon. But Venzlav knows you and he is 
in your debt. He names me, just imagine, his ambassador. Im sure he will keep it secret, I begged him. 
Dont be angry Geralt.' 

 The witcher leaned closer to him. Dandelion did not recognize his face, in the darkness he saw only 
white hair and the whitish effect of not having shaved for a few days. 

 'Im not angry.' The bard felt a hand on his shoulder and he had the feeling that the cold voice until 
now, had changed a bit. 'Im glad you came..' 


 

*** 

 

 'Im cold' shuddered Dandelion so much that the branches on which they were resting nearly broke. 
'We could light a...' 

 'Dont even think about it.' snapped the witcher. 'Did you forget where we are ?' 

 'They never ....' the startled poet looked around. 'No fire ?' 

 'Trees hate fire. They do too.' 

 'Bloody hell. We have to endure the cold ? And sit in this darkness ? If I stretch my hand I cant 
even see my own fingers...' 

 'Then dont stretch your hand.' 

 Dandelion sighed and rubbed his stiff hands. He heard, how the witcher sitting next to him was 
breaking off dry branches. 

 Suddenly a greenish light appeared in the darkness, at first dull, but slowly getting brighter. After 
the first, many more started to glow, on many places: they moved like dancers or fireflies or wisps. 
The forest awakened with lights and shadows. Dandelion also recognized the silhouettes of the 
dryads. One of them came nearer and put something that looked like a glowing wreath of grass and 
wicker near them. The bard stretched his hand and carefully approached the green fire. It was cold. 

 'What is it Geralt ?' 

 'Rotten wood and some type of moss, that grows only here in Brokilon. And only they know how 
to bind it so it glows. Thank you Fauve.' 

 The dryad did not answer but did not go away either. She sat down a bit farther from them. She 
wore a wreath on her head, her long hair fell on her shoulders. They were green, it could have been 
due to the light, or it might really have been green. Dandelion heard, that the hair of dryads had all 
kinds of colors. 

 'Taedh,' said the dryad and looked at the bard with her big eyes, glowing in her face that was split 
by two stripes of camouflage paint. Ess've vort sh'aente aen Ettariel ? Sh'aente a'vean vort ?' 

 'No... Perhaps I will sing a bit later,' he answered warmly, carefully choosing words from the Elder 
speech. The dryad stretched herself and gently stroked the lute laying next to her, then she flexibly 
stood up. Dandelion looked at her as she was leaving to join the others, whose shadows were mocing 
in the flexous light of the moss lamps. 

 'I hope I did not offend her,' he said silently. 'She speaks with their own dialect , I dont know the 
courtesy phrases...' 

 'Look if you have a knife in your ribs' according to the tone of voice the witcher was not joking. 
'To an insult, they answer with a knife. But dont be afraid Dandelion, I think they would be willing to 
forgive more than some language mistakes. They really liked your concert under the forest. Now you 
are Ard Táedh for them – The Great Singer. They wait for you to finish singing 'Flower Ettariel'. Do 
you know the rest ? Because it is not your ballad.' 


 'The translation is mine. And I enriched the elven music register a bit did you notice ?' 

 'No.' 

 'Just as I thought. Luckily the dryads know how to value art better than you. I read somewhere that 
they are unusually musical. I built my savvy plan on that, for what you by the way have not praised 
me yet.' 

 'I praise' said the witcher after a short pause. 'It was really savvy. And most of all you were lucky – 
as always. Their bows are not infallible for 200 steps. And they usually dont wait, until someone 
crosses the river and starts singing. They are very sensitive to bad smells, so if the corpse is carried 
away by the Ribbon, the forest will not smell bad.' 

 'Whatever' cleared the poet his throat. 'The main thing is, it worked and I found you. Geralt how 
do...' 

 'Do you have your razor ?' 

 'He ? Of course I do.' 

 'I will borrow it tomorrow morning. This beard is annoying me.' 

 'Why coulnd't the dryads .. Hmmm... True, they use their razors only for mushrooms. You know 
I will lend it to you. Hey, Geralt ?' 

 'Yes ?' 

 'I dont have any food. Can The Great Singer ask his hostesses for dinner ?' 

 'They dont eat dinner. Ever. And the guardians of the outskirts of Brokilon usually dont even eat 
breakfast. You will have to wait until midday. I got used to it.' 

 'But if we go to their village, to the mysterious, in the inner of the forest hidden Duén Canell...' 

 'We will never go there, Dandelion.' 

 'How is that ? I though that... They have given you asylum after all. They are... tolerating you after 
all. 

 'That is a fitting word.' 

 Both of them were silent for a long time. 


 'War' said the poet at last. 'War, hatred and contempt. Everywhere. In all hearts.' 

 'You are poemizing.' 

 'But it is true.' 

 'Just as. Well, tell me what are you carrying to me. Tell me what happened in the world, while they 
were healing me here.' 

 'First.' Dandelion cleared his throat. 'You tell me what really happened in Garstang. 

 'Triss did not tell you ?' 

 'She did. But I want to hear your version too.' 

 'Triss surely told you the more detailed and precise one. But tell me what happened while I was 
here in Brokilon...' 

 'Geralt,' choked Dandelion. 'I...ôI really dont know what happened to Yennefer and Ciri... no one 
does. Triss also...' 

 The witcher jerked violently, the branches cracked. 

 'Am I asking about Ciri or Yennefer?' he muttered with a changed voice. 'Talk about the war.' 

 'You dont know anything ? Did no news arrive here ?' 

 'Some did. But I want to hear it from you. Tell me please.' 

 'Nilfgaard attacked Lyria and Aedirn,' began the bard after a while. 'Without any declaration of 
war. The reason said to be an attack by Demavends army on some border fortress while the sorcerers 
met in Thanedd. Some say it was a provocation, that those were Nilfgaardian forces dressed as 
Demavends soldiers. How it truly was, we will never know probably. In any case, the Nilfgaardian 
answer was very swift and massive. A massive army crossed the borders, one that had to be collected 
in Dol Angra for weeks, months even. Spalla and Scala, the Lyrian border fortresses were destroyed 
while marching. Rivia was prepared for months of siege, but surrendered after just 2 days. The 
merchants and guilds were demanding it. They were promised, that if the city opens its gates and pays 
ranson, it will not be ransacked...' 

 'Was the promise honored? 

 'It was' 

 'Remarkable.' The witchers voice changed again. 'Honoring promises in these times? Not to 
mention, that in the past there were no promises, and no one expected them. The merchants and 
craftsmen did not open city gates in the past, but were defending the walls, everyone at their outpost 
or war machine.' 

 'Money has no country Geralt. The merchants dont care under whose flag they earn money. And 
the Nilfgaardian paladins dont care whose taxes they collect. The dead don't earn money, nor do they 
pay taxes.' 

 'Continue.' 

 'After the surrender of Rivia, the Nilfgaardian army continued to the north. They almost did not 
face any resistance. Demavend and Meve were pulling their soldiers back, because they could not 
create a line, and begin the decisive battle. So the Nilfgaardians got to Aldesberg. To prevent 
a blockade, Demavend and Meve decided to go to battle. The formation of their armies wasnt the 
best.. Dammit if there was more light I could draw you...' 

 'Dont draw anything. To the point. Who won ?' 

 

*** 

 

 'Did you hear the news sire?' said one of the intendants, out of breath and sweating. 'The 
messenger from the field arrived. We have won the battle! Victory! Ours, ours is the day! We have 
beaten the enemy, beaten them!' 

 'Silence,' frowned Evertsen. 'My head hurts from your yelling. Of course, I heard: ours is the day, 
ours is the battle and victory too. That surprises me! 

 The accountants and registrars got silent, and looked surprisingly at their superior. 

 'Are you not happy, sir Chamberlain?' 

 'I am. But I can be happy silently.' 


 All were suddenly silent and looked around embarrassed. Amateurs, thought Evertsen, 
overconfident amateurs. Thats no surprise but up there, on the hill evern Menno Coehoorn and Elan 
Trahe are cheering, even the grey-bearded general Braibant, all are yelling and jumping, patting each 
other on the backs like kids. Victory! Ours is the day! And whose should it be? The kingdoms of 
Aedirn and Lyria could barely muster up three thousand cavalry and ten thousand footman, and about 
a fifth was cut off the battle during the first days, cut off in besieged outposts and fortresses. Part of 
the remaining army, the enemy had to reposition to the rear and guard their flanks, endangered by 
attacks of our light cavalry or the ambushes of Scoia'tael commandos. The remaining five or six 
thousand , in that no more than twelve hundred armored knights, stood in the fields in front of 
Aldesberg. Coehoorn threw a thirteen thousand army at them, in that ten banners of heavy cavalry, the 
blooming nilfgaardian knighthood. And now they are celebrating, brawling and demanding beer. 
Victory! What a surprise... 

 With one glance he summarized the piles of papers and maps on the table, lifted his head and 
looked around. 

 'Now listen' he told his underlings 'I'm giving orders.' 

 The accountants and registrars froze in anticipation. 

 'Each one of you' he began 'listened to the speech of field marshal Coehoorn to the officers and 
soldiers yesterday. Please remember that what the marshal yesterday said to the soldiers, does not 
include you. You have other tasks and orders. Mine.' 

 Evertsen thought and rubbed his forehead. 

 'War to the palaces, peace to the huts, said the officer yesterday. You know that principle, its 
taught at the Academy. This principle applied up until now, tomorrow you will forget it. From 
tomorrow morning applies a new principle, one that will become the unofficial motto of our 
campaign. That motto and my order is: War to everything that lives, fire to everything that can be 
burned. We can only leave a wasteland behind us. tomorrow we cross the line, on which a future 
peace treaty will be signed. On the land that will not belong to us, only burned land can remain. The 
kingdoms of Rivia and Aedirn will be burned to ashes! Remember Sodden ? The time of revenge has 
come!' 

 Evertsen cleared his throat. 

 'But before the army destroys everything' he explained the silent registrars 'is our task to extract as 
much as possible from this country and land, everything that will increase the power of our Empire. 
You, Audegast, you will collect and cart all agricultural crops and plants. Everything that remains on 
the fields that has now been destroyed by Coehoorns knights must be collected... 

 'I dont have enough men sir Chamberlain...' 

 'There will be enough slaves, get the locals to work. Marder and you... I forgot your name...' 

 'Helwet. Evan Helwet, sir Chamberlain.' 

 'You two will collect all living stock. Chase up all herds, watch during quarantines in isolated 
places. Kill the sick and suspicious ones, the others have to be guided to the south on marked routes.' 

 'Yes sir!' 

 And now the special task, thought Evertsen, looking at his people. Whom to give that? All rookies, 
milk on their chins, they did not see a lot, did not experience a lot.. Ech, I need more experienced old 
subordinates... Wars, wars, always wars... Soldiers die fast, of course intendants die just as fast if we 
compare their ratio. But there is never a need for soldiers, as new ones always come. Everyone wants 
to be a soldiers, but who wants to be a registrar or accountant? Who wants to tell their families and 
friends, that their heroic deeds were collecting corn, counting sinking animals and weighing wax, how 
they lead convoys on bumpy roads, convoys that were full of loot, how they lead bellowing hers of 
animals, how they only felt dust, smells, and flies... 

 A special task. The Gulet iron factory with smelting furnaces. The kalamin works, the foundries and 
forges in Eysenlaan, fifty talents of a years production. The tin factories and laundries in Aldesberg. 
The distileries, malt, weaving and coloring factories in Vengenberg... 

 Dismantle and transport. That was the order of Emperor Emhyr – The White Flame Dancing on the 
Barrows of his Enemies. Two words. Dismantle and transport. 

 An order is an order. It has to be fulfilled. 


 And the most important task. The gold mines and their yield. Money. Valuables. Artwork. But 
I will take care of that. Personally. 

 More pillars of smoke, visible in the sky, appeared. And more. The army was rigorously carrying 
out Coehoorns orders. The Kingdom of Aedirn was changing into a Kingdom of Fire. 

 With lots of rattling and rising clouds of dust, the colony of siege machines were rolling on the 
road. Onto the still resisting Aldesberg. And onto Vengenberg, the residential city of king Demavend. 

 Peter Evertsen was looking and counting. Calculating. Peter Evertsen was the main treasurer of the 
Empire and during the war the chief chamberlain of the Nilfgaardian army. He was in this position for 
twenty five years now. Numbers and calculations, that was his entire life. 

 Mangonel's costs fifty florins, trebuchet's two hundred, a petraria at least one hundred and fifty, the 
simplest ballista eighty. A trained crew takes nine and a half florins of monthly salary each. The 
colony marching on Vengenberg costs about three hundred pounds, including the horses, oxens, tools 
and minor equipment. 'From one mark of pure metal weighing half a pound to sixty Florins' 

 In front of the slow colony was the light cavalry. Evertsen recognized the symbols on some flags: 
the tactical banner of Prince Winneburg, which was transferred to the front from Cintra. Yes, he 
thought, they have something to look forward to. The battle is won, the Aedirnian army in ruins. The 
additional reinforcements will not participate in the heavy battles with the regular army. They will 
only intercept fleeing groups, surround dispersed squads without leaders, murder, pilage and burn. 
They are looking forward to it, because its the pleasant, cheerful soldiering. One that does not tire. Not 
kill. 

 Evertsen calculated. 

 The tactical banner is made of ten regular banners, that means two thousant riders. Because 
Winneburgs men will not fight in any bigger battle, in some insignificant fights only one sixth of them 
will die or be injured. On top of that, the camps, rotten proviant, dust, lice, mosquitos, infected water 
awaits them. And that, what can not be avoided in any war: typhoid. dysentery, malaria. The diseases 
usually kill one fourth of the soldiers. We cant forget the various accidents and unpredictable events, 
planned losses are another fifth. If we count all that, about eight hundred of them will return home and 
not more. Probably less. 

 More banners were marching on the road, behind the riders were the footman. Archers in yellow 
brigandines and round helmets, crossbowmen in flat kettle hats, pavisiers and pikemen were all 
marching north. Behind them the heavy infantry, the like crabs armored veterans from Thurn, Maecht, 
Gesso, Ebbing... 

 Ignoring the heat, the Nilfgaardians regiments were marching swiftly. Drums were rumbling, flags 
waving, tips of pikes, partisans, gizarms and halbers shining. The soldiers marched cheerfufly and 
courageously. That is how a winning army marches. A undefeatable army. Onwards men, into battle! 
Onto Vengenberg! To crush the enemy, take revenge for Sodden! To enjoy the happy war, loot and 
return home... Home! 

 Peter Evertsen was watching. And counting. 

 

*** 

 

 'Vengenberg fell after a week,' added Dandelion. 'You will be surprised, but there the guilds 
defended bastions and their sections of wall until their last breath. The attackers killed the castle crew, 
defenders of the city and anyone who lived therein, six thousand people total. A massive escape 
ensued after that. The crushed squads and civilians began to escape to Temeria and Redania. Crowds 
of refugees stretched through the Pontar valley and Mahakaman foothills. But many were not able to 
escape; the nilfgaardian light cavalry were hunting them, cutting them off... Do you know why ?' 

 'I don't. I don't understand... I don't know much about warfare, Dandelion.' 

 'They wanted prisoners. Slaves. They wanted to catch as many people as possible. That is the 
cheapest work force in Nilfgaard. Thats why they were so focused on hunting refugees. It was a big 
hunt on people, Geralt. An easy hunt. Because the army was routed and no one defended the poor.' 

 'No one?' 

 'Almost no one.' 


 

*** 

 

 'We wont make it...' coughed Willis, looking over his shoulder. 'We wont escape... 

Ah hell, the border is so close... so close...' 

 Rayla stood up in her callipers and looked in the direction they came in. The road was wounding up 
around pines from the valley. Everywhere the eye could see, there was luggage, thrown away in 
a hurry, in the ditches along to road were broken carts and dead horses and cattle. Even further away 
from the forest, black columns of smoke were rising. And one could audibly hear roars and noise – the 
echoes of battle. 

 'The back train,' Willis wiped the sweat and dust of his face. 'Do you hear Rayla ? They catched up 
to our back train! They will kill them!' 

 'Now we are the back train,' said the mercanary dryly 'Its our turn.' 

 Willis grew pale, one of the soldiers listening let out a deep breath. Rayla yanked her reins, turned 
her tired horse around. 

 'We would not have made it anyway,' she stated. 'The horses would collapse after a while. They 
would catch up and kill us before we got to the pass.' 

 'Lets throw away what we can, and disappear into the forest,' proposed Willis, but did not look at 
Rayla. 'Individually, every man for himself. Perhaps we will... survive.' 

 Rayla did not answer, only gestured with a head movement toward the pass, the winding road, the 
last latecomers of the long crowd fleeing to the border. Willis understood. He swore stupidly and 
jumped to the ground. He stumbled and leaned against his sword. 

 'Down from the horses!' she shouted hoarsely at the soldiers. 'Block the road with anything you 
can find! What are you looking at ? Once our mothers bore us and once we have to die! We are 
soldiers! We are the back train! We have to stop the hunting dogs, stall...' 

 He stopped talking. 

 'If we delay the pursuit, the people will get to the other side of the mountains, to Temeria,' finished 
Rayla and also dismounted. 'There in front of us are women and children. Why do you look so 
surprised? It is our work! They paid us for that, did you forget?' 

The soldiers were looking at each other awkwardly. Rayla thought for a moment, that they will start 
running away, that they would force the tired horses to a last, desperate struggle, that they will ride to 
the colony – to the salvation of the pass. She was wrong. She guessed them wrong. 

 In a narrower place, they rolled over an abandoned cart. They hurriedly built a barricade. 
A makeshift one. A low one. An insufficient one. 

 They did not wait for long. 

 Two horses came to the glen. They panted, stumbled, shook dust of their bodies. Only one of them 
had a rider. 

 'Blaise!' 

 'Prepare yourself...' blurted the mercanary out and fell from his saddle onto the outstretched hands 
of the defenders. 'Prepare yourself... shit, they are behind me...' 

 The horse croaked, did a few stepped to the side, as if he was dancing, fell to the ground, rolled to 
the side and weakly nickered. 

 'Rayla...' rasped Blaise, looking away from the haunted animal. 'Give me somthing... A weapon. 
I lost my sword...' 

 The warrior, still watching the pillars of smoke rising to the sky from the fires in the valley, 
gestured with her head toward the cart. An axe was leaning against it. Blaise took it and hefted it. 
When he stood up, blood was dripping from his left pant leg. 

 'What about the others, Blaise ?' 

 'Dead' whispered the mercanary. 'All of them. The whole division... Rayla, its not Nilfgaard... Its 
the elves. Squirells... Scoia'tael are going ahead, ahead of the regular army.' 

 One of the soldiers was not ashamed to whimper, another one fell to the ground and hid his face in 
his palms. Willis swore and tightened the belts of his cuirass. 

 'On your positions!' called Rayla. 'Onto the barricade! They wont get us alive! That I promise!' 

 Willis spat, tore off the three colored, black-golden-red cockade of the special forces of king 
Demawen and threw it away. Rayla smoothed and rubbed her own badge. She smiled crookedly: 

 'I dont know if it will help you Willis. I really dont know.' 


 'Rayla, you promised me...' 

 'I did. And I will fulfill my promise. On your positions lads! Get the crossbows.!' 

 They did not wait long. 

 After they repelled the first wave, only six of them were left. The battle was short but tough. The 
conscripts from Vengenberg were fighting like wolves, they matched the battle-hardened soldiers in 
their ferocity. No one wanted to fall into Scoia'tael hands alive. They chose death in battle. And they 
died hit by arrows, pierced by pikes, sliced by swords. Blaise died laying down, sliced up by the 
knifes of two elves, that jumped on him after they pulled him from the barricade. But none of the two 
elves stood up again. Blaise also had a knife. 

 The Scoia'tael did not let them breath. They threw a second attack at them. Willis, hit by a spear for 
the third time, fell to the ground. 

 'Rayla! He called weakly, 'You promised!' 

 The mercenary repelled another elf and swiftly turned around. 

 'Pleasant journey, Willis,. She put her sword against his ribs and pushed. 'See you again in hell!' 

 After a while, she was alone. The Scoia'tael surrounded her on all sides. The warrior, soaked in 
blood from head to feet. Lifted her sword and twirled, her black ponytail whirling in the air. She stood 
among the dead, stooping, terrible like a demon. The elves involuntarily took a step back. 

 'Come!' she roared a challenge. 'What are you waiting for ? You wont get me alive! I am Rayla!' 

 'Gláeddyv vort, beanna,' said calmly a handsome blonde elf with a face of cherub and big skyblue 
eyes of a child, that appeared behind the backs of the hesitating Scoia'tael. His snowwhite horse 
snorted, tossed his noble head and energetically raked the blood soaked gravel of the road. 

 'Gláeddyv vort, beanna,' said the rider again. 'Throw away that sword, woman.' 

 The warrior laughed furiously. She wiped her face with her glove and that way smeared sweat with 
dust and blood into a terrible war paint. 

 'My sword was too expensive for me to throw him around, elf!' she shouted her answer. 'If you 
want to take it, you will have to break my fingers! I am White Rayla! So come!' 

 She did not wait long. 

 

*** 

 

 'No one came to help Aedirn?' asked the witcher after a long moment of silence. 'It had political 
bonds after all. Agreements of help... contracts...' 

 'Redania,' Dandelion cleared his throat 'fell into inner turmoil after the assassination of the king. 
Did you even know that Vizimir was murdered?' 

 'I know that.' 

 'The head of the state is, by title the queen Hedwig, but the land is in chaos. And terror. They are 
hunting Scoia'tael and Nilfgaardian spies. Dijkstra advised the whole kingdom, the execution places 
were red with blood. Oh and Dijkstra still cant walk. They carry him in a litter! 

 'I expected that. Did he pursue you ?' 

 'No. He could have but did not. Ach, that is not important. In any case, the inner political situation 
did not allow Redania to send the army to help Aedirn.' 

 And Temeria ? Why did Foltest of Temeria not help Demavend?' 

 'As soon as the invasion in Dol Angra started?' said Dandelion silently. 'Emhyr var Emreis sent 
a message to Vizima...' 

 

*** 

 

 'Curse them!' growled Bronibor, looking at the closed doors. 'What are they negotiating so long ? 
Why did Foltest even agree to give an audience to that Nilfgaardian dog ? He should have cut his head 
off and sent it back to Emhyr. In a bag!' 

 'By the gods, duke, ' gasped High Priest Willemer. 'But it is a messenger, an untouchable person. 
You cannot...' 


 'I cant ? I will tell you what I cant! I cant idly stand here and look, as our enemy ravages the land 
of our ally! Lyria already fell and Aedirn is in danger! Demavend wont stop Nilfgaard alone! We must 
immediately send an expedition to Aedirn and help Demavend by attacking the other side of the 
Yaruga! There are not many soldiers there now, most of them were called to the north! And we are 
negotiating here! We are talking instead of fighting! And we have a Nilfgaardian bastard as a guest!' 

 'Silence duke!' Prince Hereward of Ellander coldly tamed the old soldier. 'This is high politics. 
You have to look further than the horses head and the end of the tilted pike. We have to hear the 
messenger. Emperor Emhyr surely did not send him without a reason.' 

 'That is clear, there is a reason.' Bronibor cut him off. 'Emhyr is crushing Aedirn right now. He 
knows, that if we strike now, and with us Redania and Kaedwen we will beat him and push him even 
out of Dol Angra somehwere to Ebbing. He knows, that if we attack Cintra, we will strike him in his 
unguarded stomach, we will force him to a war on two fronts. He fears that! He tries to scare us so we 
dont cross his plans. That is the true reason why his messenger came!' 

 'It is wise, to hear out any message,' said the prince. 'and then decide, what will be best for our 
country. Demavend provoked Nilfgaard and now is paying for his hasty step. As for me, Im not in 
a hurry to go die for Vengenberg. What is going on in Aedirn, is none of our business.' 

 'Our business ? What is that, for fucks sake, bullshit ? The Nilfgaardians are in Lyria and Aedirn, 
on the right side of the Yaruga! That, that only Mahakam divides us from them is not our business ? 
Only a complete idiot could say that....' 

 'Enough arguing' Willemer cut them both off. 'Not a word more, the king comes.' 

 The doors of the negotiating room opened. The members of the Royal Council rattled as they were 
pushing their chairs, then stood up. Many places were empty. The Crown Governor and most of the 
commanders were with their armies, waiting in the Pontar Valley, Mahakaman Foothills, on the 
shores of the Yaruga. The places of the sorcerers were also empty. Sorcerers... Yes, thought priest 
Willemer, here in the royal court in Vizima, the places of the sorcerers will be empty for a very long 
time. Who knows, if not forever. 

 King Foltest strode quickly through the room, stopped at the throne, but did not sit down, only 
bowed down slightly and leaned his clenching fists on the table. He was very pale. 

 'Vengenberg is besieged,' said the Temerian ruler silenty 'and will be conquered in the next hours. 
Nilfgaard is marching to the north. The cut off regiments will resist, but they cannot change the 
outcome of the war. Aedirn is lost. Demavend fled to Redania. The fate of Queen Meve is unknown.' 

 The council was silent. 

 'Our eastern borders, that is the delta of the Pontar Valley, will be reached by Nilfgaard in a few 
days.' Talked silently Foltest. 'The last Aedirnian fortress, Hagge will not hold for long. And Hagge, 
is our eastern border. And to our southern border... a very bad thing happened. King Ervyll of Verden 
paid tribute to Emporer Emhyr. He opened the fortresses on the lower Yaruga, those that should have 
watched our flanks. On Nastrog, Rozrog and Bodrog are currently Nilfgaardian crews.' 

 The council was silent. 

 'Thanks to that, Ervyll kept his royal title, his feudal lord is Emhyr though. Formally, Vergen 
remains a kingdom, it is not a de facto Nilfgaardian province. You understand, I hope, what that 
means ? The situation has changed radically. The fortresses if Verden control the delta of the Yaruga 
and they are in the hands of the Nilfgaardians. Because of that, it is out of question for us to cross to 
river. We cannot even weaken the army there by sending help to Aedirn. It is not possible. The 
responsibility for my land and men burdens me.' 

 The council was silent. 

 'Emperor Emhyr var Emreis, Imperator of Nilfgaard,' continued the king, 'sent me a proposal... of 
an agreement. I accepted. I will tell you its contents. And you, once you have heard me out, will 
understand... You will accept that... You will say...' 

 The council was silent. 

 'You will say,' fininished Foltest hesitantly 'that I bring you peace.' 

 

*** 

 


 'So Foltest lowered his tail and crawled away,' growled the witcher and broke another stick in his 
fingers. 'He made an agreement with Nilfgaard. He left Aedirn to its fate...' 

 'Yes' confirmed the poet. 'He only sent the army to the Pontar Valley and occupied the fortress 
Hagge. The Nilfgaardians did not enter the Mahakaman Valleys, did not cross the Yaruga in Sodden, 
did not strike on Brugge, even though they have it, after Ervylls surrender, in their pliers. That was the 
cost of Temeria's neutrality.' 

 'Ciris was right,' whispered the witcher 'Neutrality... neutrality is vile.' 

 'What ?' 

 'Nothing. And what of Kaedwen, Dandelion? Why didnt Henselt help Demavend and Meve? After 
all, they also had an agreement, they were allies. And if Henselt pisses on official seals and signs on 
documents like Foltest, on the royal word, he is not completely dumb? He didnt get that after the fall 
of Aedirn and suspension of Temeria, Kaedwen is next in line? The next who stands in the way of 
Nilfgaard? He should have helped Demavend if only because of pure foresight. Faith and truth did not 
remain in the world, but has common sense disappeared too ? What, you can only find disdain and 
hatred?' 

 Dandelion looked away. The green lamps were close now, they were surrounding them in a tight 
circle. He had not noticed it before. Now he understood, that all dryads were listening to him. 

 'You are silent,' said Geralt. 'That means that Ciri was right. Codringher was right. Everyone was 
right. Only I, the naive, anachronistic, stupid witcher was not right.' 

 

*** 

 

 Centurion Digod, known under the nickname 'Halfpot', pushed the tent sheet and entered with 
angry snorts and growls. The corporals stood up and reluctantly took up a military posture. Before the 
centurions eyes could adapt to the dimness in the tent, Ziwyk quickly threw fur on a barrel of vodka 
between them. It was not because, Digod was a a zealous objector of drinking in the camp and on 
duty, but more to hide the content of the barrel from their superior. The centurioun did not have his 
nickname for nothing – he was known to drink half a pot of alcohol on more than one occasion, 
without slowing down. A military pot, he could flip over and drink like a bowl of soup, and only 
rarely did something spill in his ears. 

 'So, what is the situation sir centurion ?' asked Bode, the archer corporal. 'what did the 
commanders agree on ? What are the orders ? Will we cross the borders ?' 

 'A moment' snorted Halfpot. 'That is hic, hell! I will tell you everything, But first give me 
something to drink, my throat is dry. And dont try to tell me you dont have anything, I can smell the 
booze a mile away. I even know exactly where it is. There, under that fur.' 

 Zywik, muttering curse words, took the barrel out of hiding. The corporals leaned forward like one, 
their tin mugs clattered against each other. 

 'Aaaach' the centurion rubbed his eyes moustache 'Uuuuch, filthy crap. Pour me more Zywik.' 

'Now talk' said the Bode impatienlty. 'What are the orders ? Are we marching against the 
Nilfgaardians or will be stand here like pricks before a closed Harlotry ?' 

 'Are you missing battle ?' said Halfpot, said down heavily and leaned against a saddle. 'Are you in 
such a hurry to get to Aedirn ? You are dragged there arent you ? Hungry wolves showing their teeth, 
eh ?' 

 'Of course' answered the small Staler, shifting his weight from foot to foot. Both of them were 
crooked like a zerrikanian sabre, the legs of a old cavalry man. 'Of course sircenturion. We are on 
duty for the fifth night now, we sleep in our boots. That is why we want to know, what awaits us. Are 
we going to battle or back to the castle ?' 

 'We are crossing the borders,' said Halfpot finally. 'tomorrow at dawn. Five banners, the Grey at 
the front. And now pay attention, as I am telling you what orders did the great magrave Masfeld of 
Ard Caraigh, that came right from the king, tell the commanders and centurions. Remember 
everything, because I will not repeat anything. And they are orders that are unheard of. 

 The whole tent grew silent. 


'Nilfgaard moved out of Dol Angra,' began the centurion. They marched through Lyria, in 
four days they reached Aldesberg and crushed Demavends army. In barely six days of siege they 
captured Vengenberg by betrayal. Now they are marching north and pushing the remains of 
Aedirnian military to the Pontar Valley and to Dol Blathanna. They are nearing Kaedwen. That is why 
we have the orders to cross the border and march south, towards the Valley of Flowers. In three days, 
the Dun Banner must stand on the river Dyfne. In three days, so we will march really quickly But not 
a step further than Dyfne. I repeat, not a single step! Shortly afterwards, the Nilfgaardians will appear 
on the other side. With them, and now pay attention, we cannot fight them. Under any circumstances 
do you understand ? Only if they will try to cross the river will we go to the shore and show our flags 
so that they know its us, the Kaedweni army.' 

 It seemed that there could not be a bigger silence in the tent, 

 'How is that ?' said Bode after a while. 'Not fight Nilfgaardians ? We are going to war arent we ? 
How is it, sir centurion ?' 

 'The order was: we are not going to war, but...' Halfpot scratched his neck. 'But we are carrying 
brotherly help. We are crossing the borders to protect the people of Upper Aedirn... Aw hell what am 
I saying?... Not Aedirn but the Lower Marks. That was what the great margrave Masnfeld said. He 
explained us, that Demawend was crushed, because he ruled stupidly and lead shitty politics. And 
just as with him, its the end of Aedirn. Only our king helped Demavend, borrowed him lots of money 
– and such riches cant be just ignored. It is time to get our money back with interest. We also cant let 
out brothers and countrymen from the Lower Marks get under the control of Nilfgaard. We have to 
free them, so that the Lower Marks, the ancient territory of Kaedwen, once under our rule, now 
returns to our rule. Up to the river Dyfne. Our beloved king Henselt agreed on that border with Emhyr 
of Nilfgaard. An agreement is an agreement, but the Grey Banner must stand on the shores of the 
river. Understood ?' 

 No one asnwered. Halfpot frowned and waved his hand: 

 'You didnt undestand shit, as I see. You dont have to worry about it, because even I didnt 
understand much more than you. Most importantly our beloved king, dukes and nobility understands. 
We are the army, we have to get to Dyfne in three days, occupy the shore and stay alert! And thats it! 
Pour me more Ziwyk.' 

 'Sir centurion,' stuttered Ziwyk. 'What if... What if some Aedirnian soldiers intercept us ? What if 
they resist ? After all we are marching armed through their land. What will we do ?' 

 'And what if our brothers and countrymen, added carefully Staler, 'they that we have to free, 
begin to shoot arrows or throw stones at us ? What then eh ?' 

 'In three days we have to stand on the shores of Dyfne.' strongly reiterated Halfpot. 'If someone 
tries to stop or stall us, it is a clear enemy. And enemies have to be neutralized on the spot! But, this is 
an order! The huts and barns are not to be burned, the cattle not taken, do not pillage or rape the 
women! Get that in your damn heads and the heads of your soldiers, who breaks this order will be 
hanged. The duke repeated it at least ten times: ,It is not, for fucks sake, a raid, but brotherly help!' 
Why are you grinning Staler ? This is an order for fucks sake! And now, out to your squads, everyone 
hurry up, the horses and equipment must shine like the full moon! In the evening there is a rapport, the 
duke and commanders want to see how the army is prepared. If some squad gets drunk, then the 
corporal will wish he was never born! He wont forget me until his death! Carry out!' 

 Ziwyk got out with the others, blinked on the sharp sunlight and looked at the chaos in the camp. 
Corporals hurried to their squads, centuriouns talked, cadets and squires were in the way of everyone. 
Cuirassiers from the Ban Ard trained and clouds of dust rose around them. The heat was unbearable. 

 Ziwyk sped up. He passed four musicians, that came from Ard Carraigh yesterday. The artists sat in 
the shade of their richly decorated tent of margrave Mansfeld and were composing heroic songs about 
the victorious campaign, about the kings wisdom, the composure of the dukes and the bravery of the 
simple soldiers. As always, they did it in advance so they did not waste time. 

 'Our brothers welcome us, welcomed us with breaaaad and saaaalt...' sung one of them. 'The 
rescuers welcomed themselves and the rescued with bread and saaalt... I say, Hrafnir, tell me some 
rhyme on 'salt'! 

 The second musician told a rhyme. Ziwyk did not hear it. 


 His squad camped under willows near a pond. 

 'Ready yourself!' growled Ziwyk and stood far away enough for none of his man to smell his 
breath. If would have no positive influence on morale. 'Before the sun moves my four fingers, the 
squad has to be ready for an inspection. Everything must shine: weapons, armor, equipment, horses! 
In the evening there will be a rapport, if I get disgraced by any of you, I will break your bones. That 
son of a bitch will never forget me! Come on!' 

 'We are going to battle,' guessed Kraska and quickly put his shirt into his pants. ' Are we going to 
battle sir corporal ?' 

 'And what did you think ? That we are going to dance harvest-home ? We are crossing the borders. 
tomorrow at dawn the whole Dun Banner marches. The centurion did not say in which formation, 
but our squad will be in the front as always. So, move your arses! Hey, wait a moment! I have to tell 
you something and that is an order. This will not be regular war lads.The dukes made up some shitty 
new stuff, some rescuing or something. We are not going to the enemy but with well,... brotherly help 
for our ancient territory, yeah. So watch out what I say now: leave the people in Aedirn in peace, dont 
steal...' 

 'Why is that ? Kraska's mouth opened in disbelief. 'Dont steal ? And what will we feed the horses 
corporal ?' 

 'Get enough food for horses but not more. Dont beat the people, dont burn the huts, dont destroy 
the crops... Shut your mouth Kraska! We are no raid, but an army, to hell with you! You will obey 
your orders or get hanged! As I said: dont pillage, dont burn, the women...' 

 Zywik paused and pondered. 

 'The women', he added after a while 'plough them silently and out of sight, so that you are not 
seen.' 

 

*** 

 

 'On the bridge over Dyfne,' finished Dandelion, 'they shook hands. Margrave Mansfeld of 
Ard Carraigh and Menno Coehoorn, supreme commander of the nilfgaardian army of Dol Angra. 
They shook hands over the bleeding and flickering kingdom of Aedirn and sealed so the robbery 
sharing of loot. The most disgusting symbol the world has ever seen.' 

 Geralt was silent. 

 'As we are at disgusting symbols, Dandelion,' he asked after a moment, 'what did the 
sorcerers think ? I mean those from the Council and Chapter ?' 

 'None remained with Demavend,' answered the poet. 'Foltest, on the other hand, banished all 
of the mages that served him from Temeria. Phillipa is in Tretogor, she helps queen Hedwig with the 
turmoil that is still in Redania. Triss and three others whose names I can't remember are with her. 
A few sorcerers are in Kaedwen, many fled to Kovir and Hengfors. Many chose neutrality, because 
Esterad Thyssen and Medamir are, as you know, still neutral.' 

 'I know. And Vilgefortz ? And those who were with him ?' 

 'Vilgefortz disappeared. It was expected that he would show up in the conquered Aedirn as the 
Emhyr governor. But no one has seen him or heard of him. Of him, or his companions. Except...' 

 'Speak, Dandelion.' 

 'Except one sorceress. She became queen...' 

 

*** 

 

 Filavandrel aep Fidhail silently waited for his answer. The queen, looking out of a window, 
was also silent. The window lead into a garden, one that was until recently the pride of the previous 
ruler of Dol Blathanna, a governor of the tyrant of Vengenberg. Fleeing from the Free Elves, 
marching as the vanguard of the imperial armies, the governor took most valuables from the ancient 
elven castle, even part of the furniture. But he could not steal the garden – so he destroyed it. 

 'No, Filavandrel,' the queen finally answered his question. 'It is too soon for that, too soon. We 
should not think about expanding our borders, for we dont even safely know where they are now. 


Henselt of Kaedwen stands on the shores of Dyfne. The scouts report that he still hasnt stopped 
thinking about possible aggresion. He could attack us any day.' 

 'So we have not accomplished anything.' 

 The queen slowly stretched her hand. A Small Tortoiseshell, that entered through the window, sat 
down on her laced sleeve, folded and unfolded its colorful wings. 

 'We have accomplished more,' reminded the queen very silently, as to not frighten the butterfly 
'that we could have hoped. After a hundred years we finally have our Valley of Flowers back...' 

 'I would not call it like that,' smiled Filavandrel bitterly. 'After the march of the army, its more 
like the Valley of Ashes.' 

 'We have our own land again,' the queen answered and carefully inspected the butterfly. 'We are 
a nation again, and not exiles. And ashes fertilize the land, the Valley will bloom once again in 
spring.' 

 'That is little, Daisy, very little. We have become modest. Only recently, we boasted that we would 
push the humans to the seas, from where they came. And now he limited our lands and ambition only 
on Dol Blathanna.' 

 'Emhyr Deithwen gave us Dol Blathanna as a gift. What do you expect me to do Filavandrel ? 
Should I demand more ? Do not forget, that in accepting gifts we have to have a certain degree of 
gratitude. Especially when it is Emhyr's gifts, for the Emperor never gives anything for free. The land 
he gave us, we have to keep. The powers that we have, are just enough to defend Dol Blathanna.' 

 'We will pull out the commandos from Temeria, Redania and Kaedwen,' advised the whitehaired 
elf. 'Lets call all Scoia'tael fighting the humans. You are their queen now, Enid, they will obey you. 
Now, that we have our own land, their fight lost its meaning. Their duty is to come back and protect 
the Valley of Flowers. Let them fight as a free nation protecting their country. For now, they are dying 
in forests like bandits.' 

 The elf's head sank. 

 'Emhyr will not allow it,' she whispered. 'The commandos are to continue fighting.' 

 'Why ? What for ?' straightened suddenly Filavandrel aep Fidhail. 

 'I will tell you more. It is forbidden for us to support and help them. That was Foltest's and 
Henselt's condition. Temeria and Kaedwen will respect our authority in Dol Blathanna, but only if we 
officially condemn the actions if the Squirrels and terminate all connections.' 

 ' Those children are dying, Daisy. They are dying each day, dying in a unfair battle. After the 
hidden contracts with Emhyr, the people will turn on them and crush them. After all, they are our 
children, our future! Our blood! And you are telling me, we have to terminate all our connections. 
Que'ss aen me dicette, Enid? Vorsaeke'llan? Aen vaine?' 

 The butterfly fluttered its wings, rose and flew to the window, where the flow on hot air carried it 
away. Francesca Findabair called Enid an Gleanna, formerly a sorceress, now the queen of Aen 
Seidhe, the Free Elves, looked up. In her beautiful blue eyes, tears glistened. 

 'The commandos,' she said silently, 'must continue the war. They have to trouble the human 
kingdoms, make their preparations for war more difficult. That is Emhyr's order. I cannot stand 
against the Emperor. Forgive me Filavandrel.' 

 'Filavandrel aep Fidhail looked at her and bowed deeply. 

 'I forgive you Enid. But I do not know, if they will too.' 

 

*** 

 

 'Not one of the sorcerers changed their mind ? Not even when Nilfgaard was beating and burning 
Aedirn, no one abandoned Vilgefortz and joined Phillipa ?' 

 'No one' 

 Geralt was silent for a long time. 

 'I dont believe it,' he said finally very silently. 'I dont believe that none would reject Vilgefortz, 
when his true motives and consequences for his betrayal came to light. I am, as is known, a naive, 
stupid, anachronistic witcher. Perhaps that is why I cannot believe that none of the mages conscience 
awakened.' 


*** 

 

 Tissaia de Vries put her trained decorative signature under the last sentece of the letter. After some 
thinking, she added an ideogram telling her true name. A name, that no one these days knew. A name, 
she has not used for a long, long time. From the time, she became a sorceress. 

 Lark. 

 She put down the pen. Very carefully, straight, exactly across the written sheet of parchment. For 
a long time she sat motionless, looking at the red ball of the setting sun. Then she stood up. She went 
to the window. For some time, she looked at the house roofs.Houses, in which ordinary people were 
going to sleep, tired from their ordinary human lives and work, full of ordinary human fears of what 
awaits them, what will happen tomorrow. The sorceress looked at the message on the table. A 
message for ordinary people. The fact, that most ordinary people could not read, was not important. 

 She stood in front of the mirror. She adjusted her hair. Adjusted her clothes. Blew a nonexistent 
speck from her puffed sleeve. Adjusted her necklace of spinel over her neckline. 

 The candles under the mirror were not on their places. A maid must have touched them while 
cleaning the room. The maid – an ordinary woman. An ordinary person with eyes full of fear, of what 
would happen. An ordinary person, lost in the times of contempt. An ordinary person looking for hope 
and assurance in her, in a sorceress... 

 

 


 An ordinary person, whose trust she did not fulfill. 

 From the streets, an echo of steps came to her, of heavy military steps. Tissaia de Vries did not do 
a single motion, did not turn her head to the window. She did not care whose steps it were. The royal 
guard ? The judge with the order to arrest the traitress ? Assassins ? Vilgefortz men ? She did not care. 

 The steps grew quiet in the streets. 

 The candles under the mirror were not in the right place. The sorceress arranged them, arranged the 
position of the tablecloth, so that its corner fell exactly in the middle of the table edge and was parallel 
with the square candlestand. She pulled her golden armbands from her wrists and put them on the 
smooth tablecloth. She looked at everything with her critical eyes, but did not find any error. 
Everything was perfect, exactly, as it should be. 

 She opened a shelf of a dresser and took out a short scalpel with a bone handle. 

 Her face was hard and motionless. Dead. 

 The house was silent. So silent that one could hear the petal of a fading Tulip fall on the table. 

 The sun, red as blood, slowly set behind the roofs. 

 Archmistress Tissaia de Vries sat down on her chair, blew out the candles, arranged the postion of 
the pen on the parchment for one last time, then cut the wrists on both of her hands. 

 

*** 

 

 The fatigue from the all day travel showed. Dandelion suddenly woke up and realized, that he 
probably fell asleep while talking. He moved a bit and rolled from the heap of branches; Geralt was 
not laying next to him and their night-lying area lost balance. 

 'Where did...' he sat down and cleared his throat. 'Where did I stop ? Ah, at the mages... Geralt ? 
Where are you?' 

 'Here' said the invisible witcher out of the darkness. 'Continue please. You were about to talk 
about Yennefer.' 

 'Listen,' answered the bard, that perfectly knew, that he will not mention even a word about that 
person concerned. 'I really dont...' 

 'Dont lie. I know you.' 

 'If you know me that well,' said the bard angrily, 'why the hell are you forcing me to talk. You 
know me like a gappy penny, you must know why I was silent, why why did not repeat overheard 
gossip! You must know what kind of gossip they are and why I want to spare you from them! 

 'Que suecc's?' reacted one of the sleepy dryads on his raised voice. 

 'I am sorry,' said the witcher silently. 

 The Brokilonian Lamps faded, only a few green lights remained. 

 'Geralt,' interrupted Dandelion the silence. 'You always said, that you stand aside, you dont care 
about anything... She could have believed it. Perhaps she believed it when she took part in Vilgefortz 
game...' 

 'Enough,' stopped him Geralt. 'Not a word more. If I hear the word game, Im in the mood to choke 
someone. Ech, better give me your razor, I want to shave finally.' 

 'Now? Its still dark...' 

 'It is never too dark for me. Im a mutant.' 

 The witcher ripped the pack with toilet needs from his hands and went to the well. Dandelion 
found out, that sleepiness had completely left him. The sky was getting brighter, dawn grew near. He 
stood up and walked under the trees, carefully avoiding the sleeping, cuddling dryads 

 'Do you belong to those, who caused it?' 

 He sharply turned around. The dryad leaning on the pine had hair the color of silver, he could see 
that even in twilight. 

 'An unpleasant view,' she said and crossed her hands on her chest. 'The one, who lost everything. 
It is interesting, bard, because I once though that one can never lose everything, that something always 
has to remain. Always. Even in the times of contempt, where naivety can take revenge in the cruelest 
way, one cannot lose everything. And he... He lost a lot of blood, the option of healthy walking, 
partial movement of his left hand, a witchers sword, the woman he loves, the daughter he 


miraculously found, confidence, faith... I told myself, that there had to be something he had not lost. 
But I was wrong, he has nothing, not even that razor.' 

 Dandelion didnt say anything, The dryad didnt move. 

 'I asked, if you also took part in it.' she said after a while. 'Perhaps my question was pointless. 
Obviously, it is also your fault. If someone has friends, but still loses everything, they are also guilty. 
For what they did, or did not. Guilty for not knowing, what they had to do.' 

 'What could I have done ?' he whispered silently. 'What could I have changed?' 

 'I dont know,' answered the dryad. 

 'I didnt tell him everything...' 

 'That I know.' 

 'Im not guilty.' 

 'But you are.' 

 'No! Im not! 

 He jumped up, the branches of their improvised bed cracked. Geralt was sitting next to him and 
wiped his face. He smelled of soap. 

 'You are not ?' he asked. 'What did you imagine ? That you are a frog prince ? Calm down, you 
are not. That you are a braggart? In that case, it may have been a precognitive dream.' 

 Dandelion looked around. They were alone. 

 'Where... Where are they?' 

 'In the outskirts of the forest. Pack up, your time has come. 

 'Geralt, a moment ago I talked to a dryad. She talked common without an accent. She told me...' 

 'No dryad in this squad talks common without accent. You imagined something, Dandelion. This 
is Brokilon, here you can see all kinds of stuff.' 

 

*** 

 

 On the outskirts of the forest, one single dryad awaited them. Dandelion recognized her 
immediately, it was the one with green hair that brough them the light and wanted him to sing more 
yesterday night. She raised her hand for them to stop. In her second hand, she held a bow and strung 
arrow. Geralt put his hand on the bards shoulder and pressed strongly. 

 'Is something wrong?' asked silently Dandelion. 

 'Of couse. Be silent and dont move.' 

 The thick mist over the Ribbon muffled voices and sounds, but not enough, as Dandelion heard 
splashes and snuffling of horses. Riders were wading through the river. 



 'Elves' he figured. 'Scoia'tael. They are running to Brokilon to hide right ? A whole commando...' 

 'No' said Geralt, looking at the mist. The poet knew that the witchers senses were incredibly sharp 
and sensitive, although even he could not tell whether he was using sight or hearing. 'That is no 
commando, only those who remain. Five or six riders, three additional horses. Stay here Dandelion, 
Im going there.' 

 'Gar'ean,' warned the green-haired dryad and raised her bow. 'N'te va, Gwynbleidd! Ki'rin!' 

 'Thaess aep, Fauve,' interrupted the the witcher unexpectedly harshly. Aespar que va'en, ell'ea? 
Help yourself, shoot. If not be silent and dont try to scare me off. Nothing will make me afraid 
anymore. I have to talk to Milwa Barring and I will do it, whether you like it or not! Wait here, 
Dandelion.' 

 The dryad dipped her head. And her bow. 

 Nine horses emerged from the mist. Dandelion noticed, that truly only six of them had riders. He 
recognized indistinct forms of dryads, abandoning the undergrowth and going towards them. He 
noticed, that three riders needed help dismounting and had to be supported, so that could reach the 
hideout of Brokilonian trees. Other dryads ran into the mist and disappeared like ghosts. From the 
other shore, sounds of cries, whinning of horses and splashing water could be heard after a while. He 
had the feeling he also heard the whiz of arrows, but he was not sure. 

 'They were followed...' he let out a sigh. Fauve turned to him. Her fingers still held her bow. 

 'Sing a song, taedh' she hissed. 'N'te shaent a'minne, not about Ettariel. Not love. No time. Now 
it is time to kill, so. Sing such a song, so!' 

 'I, I,' he stuttered, 'I did not cause what is happening...' 

 The greenhaired was silent for a while and looked away. 

 'I did not either,' she said and disappeared into the undergrowth. 


 The witcher returned after about an hour. He led two saddled horses - Pegas and a brown mare. On 
the mare were bloodstains. 

 'That is an elven horse eh? Of those who came through the river?' 

 'Yes' confirmed Geralt. His face was motionless and his voice was alien. 'That is an elven mare. 
I will take her. Once I have the opportunity, I will trade her for a horse, that knows how to carry 
a wounded man, and if the wounded falls, stays with him. They did not teach that to this mare.' 

 'Are we leaving ?' 

 'You are leaving,' the witcher handed Dandelion his reins. 'Farewell, Dandelion. The dryads will 
accompany you two miles upstream and there you can go, and not fall into the hands of the Brugge 
mercanaries, that still could be waiting on the other shore.' 

 'And you? Will you stay here?' 

 'No, I wont.' 

 'You learned something? From the Squirells? Something about Ciri?' 

 'Good luck, Dandelion.' 

 'Geralt! Listen...' 

 'What should I listen to?' shouted the witcher and his voice broke. 'I cant... I cant just leave her to 
her destiny. She is alone... She must not be alone, Dandelion! You cannot understand that. No one 
understands but I know... If she is alone, the same thing will happen as before... What once happened 
to me... You dont understand...' 

 'I understand. Thats why Im going with you.' 

 'Are you insane? Do you know where Im heading?' 

 'I know Geralt, I... I didnt tell you everything, I... I feel guilty. I didnt do anything, I did not know 
what to do... But now I know. I will go with you. Im your friend. I did not tell you... about Ciri, about 
the gossip I heard. I met friends from Kovir, that heard with their own ears the messages, that came 
from Nilfgaard,,, I figure that those messages may have reached the Squirells. That you already know 
everything from the elves that came through the Ribbon. But allow... that it will be me... that tell you 
everything...' 

 The witcher stood with his head and clueless hands hanging. 

 'Jump on your horse,' he finally said with a resignated voice. 'You will tell me on the way.' 

 

*** 

That morning, an unusual excitement reigned over castle Loc Grim, the summer residence of the 
Emperor. Even more unusual because all excitement and impatience surely did not belong to the 
customs of the Nilfgaardian nobility and all expressions of impatience and excitement were regarded 
as inmature. Similar behaviour was regarded as punishable by the Nilfgaardian aristocracy, that even 
the inmature youth was ahshamed of it, and for them, excitement and inmature feelings were natural 
and excusable. 

 That morning on Loc Grim, no youth was present, they had no place here. The great throne room 
was filled by serious and stern magnates, squires and knights, all dressed in ceremonial court black, 
like one man, refreshed only by white collars and cuffs. The men were accompanied by equally 
serious and stern ladies, whom customs allowed to decorate their black dresses with jewelry. All 
showed dignity, seriousnes and strictness. But in truth, they were incredibly excited. 

'They say she is ugly. Thin and ugly.' 

'But it is supposed to be royal blood.' 

'From a illegitimate annexion. 

'Nothing like that. She is no bastard.' 

'Will she sit on the throne then?' 

'The Emperor will decide...' 

 'Aw hell, look at Ardal aep Dahy and Prince de Wett... How they are looking... As if they drank 
vinegar...' 


'Silence, Graf... Are you suprised? If something from the gossip is true, then Emhyr will give the 
squares to an ancient lineage. He will humiliate them...' 

'Gossip will remain gossip, it will not be confirmed. The Emperor will not marry that bastard! He 
cannot do that...' 

'Emhyr can do anything. Careful with your words baron, be careful what you say. There have 
been people who said that the Emperor cannot do this or that. They end up on executed.' 

'I heard he already signed the decree, where he assessed the allowance. Three hundred talents of 
annual rent. Consider that.' 

'And the title of Infanta. Did any of you see her ?' 

'Immediately after arriving she was entrusted to Countess Liddertal. Her house is guarded now.' 

'The Countess probably got the order to teach that brat some manners. A new Infanta is said to 
behave like the child of cows.' 

'What is so strange about that? She is from the north, from the barbaric Cintra...' 

'The more are the gossip about Emhyrs wedding more unlikely. No, no, that is completely 
impossible. The Emperor will marry de Wetts youngest daughter, as was established. He will not 
marry that self proclaimed princess!' 

'It is about time he marries someone at all. For the dynasty... It is about time Nilfgaard gets 
a crown prince...' 

'Then let him marry. Of course not with that barbaric tomboy!' 

'Quieter, not so loud! I assure you, dear gentlemen, that will not happen. What goal would such 
a marriage further?' 

'Politics, Comtesse. We are at war. Such a marriage would have politcal but also strategical 
importance... The dynasty, from which the Infant comes from, has legal titles and recognized feudal 
rights for the lands around the Lower Yarra. If she becomes the wife of the Emperor... Ha that would 
be a move! Look there at ambassador Esterad, how they whisper...' 

'I hope that your eccentric theory is not serious, prince? Or did you advise Emhyr to do that?' 

'It is my business, what I mean seriously and what not. As for the Emperors decision, you would 
do best if you would not question it. You and everyone else.' 

'So he already decided?' 
'I do not judge. 
'Then you are wrong.' 
'What do you mean, lady?' 
'Emhyr banished Baroness Tarnhann from the court. He ordered her to return to her husband.' 
'He drove out Dervla Tryffin Broinne? Impossible! She was his favorite for three years...' 
'I repeat, he sent her away from the court.' 
'That is true. I heard that, Dervla Goldhair caused a horrible scene. Four guards had to forcibly 
push her into the carriage...' 

 'Her husband will be happy...' 

 'I doubt it. 

 'By the Great Sun! Emhyr rejected Dervla? Kicked her out because of that foundling? Because of 
that barbarian from the North?' 

 'Quieter! Quieter, curse you...' 

 'Who is behind it? What side?' 

 'Quieter, please. They are watching us...' 

 'That small bitch... I mean infant... is said to be ugly. Once the Emperor sees her...' 

 'You mean, he has not seen her yet?' 

 'He did not have time. He came from Darn Ruach an hour ago.' 

 'Emhyr never chose an ugly one. Aine Dermott... Clara aep Gwydolyn Gor...Dervla Tryffin 
Broinne... All beauties...' 

 'Perhaps that savage will grow pretty...' 

 'Once she bathes? I heard the nobility of the North does not do that often....' 

 'Careful with your words. You may be talking about the future Emperors wife...' 

 'She is still a child. She is not older than fourteen.' 


 'It would obviously be a political marriage... A pure formality...' 

 'If that was the truth, then Dervla Goldhair would remain in the court. The Cintran waif, 
politically and formally on the throne at Emhyrs side... And in the evenings, Emhyr would give her 
the crown jewels to play with and he would dissapear into Dervla's room... At least until she gets old 
enough to give him an heir.' 

 'Hmm... you may be right. So what is the name of this.... infant?' 

'Xerella or something like that.' 
'No, no. It is... Zirilla. Yes, Zirilla.' 
'A barbaric name!' 
'Quieter, damn it!' 
'Keep the seriousness. You are acting like some fools.' 
'You dare! I might consider those words an insult!' 
If you want satisfaction, paladin, you know where you will find me!' 

 'Silence. The Emperor...' 

 The herold did not have to do much: a single tap of the pole on the floor was enough for the heads 
of the nobility and knighthood to bow down like crops on a windy day. Such silence grew in the 
throne room, that the herold did not even have to raise his voice: 

 'Emhyr var Emreis, Deithwen Addan yn Carp aep Morvudd!' 

 The White Flame Dancing on the Grave-Mounds of Enemies entered the room. With his usual 
lively walk, his right hand energeticaly waving his right hand, he walked the Wall of nobility. The 
Emperor's black dress did not differ from others, though it lacked the laced collars and cuffs. His 
black hair, never artificially curled, was held by a thin gold band, on his neck, the imperial chain 
gleamed. 

 Emhyr walked on the podium and casually sat down on the throne, put his elbow on the armrest 
and put his hand under his chin. He did not swing his leg on the other armrest, which meant, that the 
ceremony is still in effect. None of the bowed heads rose even an inch. 

 The Emperor loudly cleared his throat. The guests let out a breath and stood upright. The herold 
tapped the floor a second time. 

 'Cirilla Fiona Elen Riannon, Princess of Cintra, Princess of Brugge and duchess of Sodden, 
heiress of Inis Ard Skellig and Inis An Skellig, protector of Attre and Abb Yarra!' 

 All eyes turned to the doors, where a tall, dignous Stella Congreve, comtesse of Liddertal stood. 
Next to the comtesse, stood the holder of all the previously listen magistral titles. Blond, pale, skinny, 
slightly stooped, dresses in a long lightblue dress in which she obviously felt uneasy. 

 'Emhyr Deithwen straightened up in his throne, the guests immediately bowed down. Stella 
Congreve inconspicuously pushed the blonde girl forward and both walked through the hall of bowing 
nobles, the representatives of Nilfgaards best families. The girl walked stiff and uncertain. She tried to 
copy the comtesse. 

 Cirilla Fiona Elen Riannon stumbled. 

 Ugly and skinny, thought the comtesse on the way to the throne. Clumsy and even not very smart. 
But I will make a lady out of her. I will make a Princess out of her, just like Emhyr ordered. 

 The White Flame of Nilfgaard watched her from the height of his throne. Like usual, his eyes were 
slightly narrowed and on his lips, a hint of a snide smile was playing. 

 The Princess of Cintra stumbled a second time. The Emperor leaned back and touched his cheek 
with a finger. He was smiling. Stella Congreve was close enough to judge that smile. She froze with 
fear. Something is not right, she realized, terrified. Something is not right. By the Great Sun, heads 
will fall... 

 She retained presence of mind, bowed down, and forced the girl to do the same. 

 Emhyr var Emreis did not stand up from his throne. But he slightly nodded his head. The guests 
held their breath. 

 'Princess,' said the Emperor. The girl cringed. Emhyr did not look at her, but he fixedly observed 
the nobility assembled in the hall. 

 'Princess,' he repeated his salutation. 'I am happy to be able to greet you in my home and my 
land. I assure you, with my imperial word, that the day is near, when all your titles, that rightly belong 


to you, and all lands, that you are entitled to inherit, will be returned to you. The usurpers, who seized 
your lands, have declared me war. They attacked the Imperium, under the excuse of guarding the 
rights of your lineage. Let the world know, that you came to me, not them, with a plea of help. Let the 
world know, that here, in my lands, you are greeted with acceptance and honor, belonging to your 
status, while you were a mere exile in the lands of my enemies. Let the world know, that in my lands, 
you are safe, while my enemies not only denied you your crown, but even sought your life.' 

 The Emperors look stopped at the ambassadors of Esterad Thyssen, king of Kovir and on the 
ambassador of Nedamir, ruler of the Hengfors League. 

 'Let the world know, including the kings, that hesitated on which side is law and justice. I declare, 
in front of the world, that assistance will be provided, yours and my enemies will be defeated. In 
Cintra, in Sodden and Brugge, in Attra, on the islands of Skellig and in the delta of the Yarra, peace 
will rule again, and you will sit down on the throne to the delight of your epasants and all justice 
loving people.' 

 The girl in the lightblue dress, bowed her head even lower. 

 'Until that time comes,' continued Emhyr, 'you will be treated in my land with due respect and 
seriousness from me and my people. And, because in your kingdom, the flames of war are still 
burning, as proof of my respect and friendship of Nilfgaard, I grant you the title of Infanta of Rowan 
and Ymlac, Lady of the castle Darn Rowan, to which you will go now, to await to coming of a calmer, 
happier time.' 

 Stella Congreve controlled herself perfectly, she did not allow even a shadow of astonishment to 
cross her face. He wont leave her with him, she thought, he is sending her to Darn Rowan, to the end 
of the world, where he wont ever come. It is obvious, that he will not court the girl and he wont even 
think of marriage. It looks like, he does not even want to see her. Why did he get rid of Dervla then? 
What is he hiding? 

 She recovered, quickly grabbed the infants arm. The audience ended. As they were leaving the 
room, the guests were bowed, but the Emperor did not watch them anymore. 

 Once they left, Emhyr var Emreis threw his leg over the armrest of the throne. 

 'Caellach,' he said. 'To me.' 

 The Seneschal stopped in the distance, that the ceremonial allowed and bowed down. 

 'Closer,' ordered Emhyr. 'Come closer, Caellach. I will speak silently. What I say now, is only for 
your ears.' 

 'Your majesty...' 

 'What is still planned for today?' 

 'The takeover of delegating documents and the granting of the formal exequatur to the ambassador 
of king Nedamir of Kovir,' said the Seneschal quickly. 'The naming of governors, prefects and 
paladins. The confirmation or earldom and the relevent time allowance to...' 

 'We will give the exequatur to the ambassador and I will accept him on a private audience. The 
other things, tomorrow.' 

 'As you order, your Majesty.' 

 'Tell vicecount Eiddon and Skellen, that immediatelly after the audience, I await them in the 
library. For a confidential meeting. You will also be there. And you wil bring your famous mage, that 
farseer.. What is his name?' 

 'Xarthisius, Majesty. He lives in the tower near the city...' 

 'Im not interested in where he lives. Bring him to my rooms. Silently, secretly.' 

 'Your Majesty... is it smart to have that astrologer...' 

 'I gave an order Caellach.' 

 'Yes, your Majesty.' 

 Before even three hours passed, all who were summoned assembled in the imperial library. The 
invitation did not suprise Vattier de Rideaux, vicecount of Eiddon. Vattier was the leader of military 
intelligence and Emhyr called him quite often – after all, Nilfgaard was at war. The invitation did not 
surprise Stefan Skellen, called Kalous, either. The Emperor granted him the function of coroner – the 
expert on special and strange missions. Because of that, Kalous was never surprised by anything. 


 The third guest, however was increadibly surprised and also terrified of the invitation. Even more 
so, because the Emperor turned to him first: 

 'Master Xarthisius...' 

 'Your Imperial Majesty...' 

 'I have to discover the location of a certain person. A person, that disappeared or is hiding. 
Perhaps that person is imprisoned. All mages, to whom I gave this task, failed. You will take care of 
it.' 

 'How far is this... How far may this person be?' 

 'If I knew that, I would not need you.' 

 'I beg for pardon, Imperial Majesty...' choked the astrologer. 'The problem is, that great distances 
make astromancy very difficult and virtually excludes... Ehm, ehm... And if that person is under 
magical protection... I can try, but...' 

 'To the point, master.' 

 'I need time... Preparations... If the conjuction of the stars will be favorable... Ehm, ehm... 
Your Imperial Majesty demands a uneasy task. I need time...' 

 Just a moment more, and Emhyr will have him impaled on a tree, thought Kalous. If that sorcerer 
wont stop bumbling... 

 'Master Xarthisius,' said the Emperor unexpectedly calmly, and kindly. 'You will get everything 
you need. Including time. Within reasonable limits of course.' 

 'I will do what is in my powers,' assured the astrologer. 'but I will only be able to pinpoint 
a approximate localization.. That means an area or radius....' 

 'What?' 

 'Asromancy...' choked Xarthisius. Astromancy allows on great distances only a approximate 
area... With a great tolerance... Very great. I dont know if I will be able...' 

 'You will be able, master,' said the Emperor and his dark eyes flashed ominously. 'Your abilities 
have my full confidence. And about the tolerance: the smaller yours, the bigger mine will be.' 

 Xarthisius cringed. 

 'I will need the exact date of birth of that person,' he said. 'If possible also the hour. Something 
that belongs to that person would also help immensely.' 

 'Hair,' said Emhyr silently. 'Can it be hair?' 

 'Ach!' rejoiced the astrologer. 'Hair! That will significantly help... If only I had urine or 
excrements...' 

 He looked into Emhyrs eyes and shut his mouth and fell on his knees. 

 'I humbly ask your Imperial Majesty for forgiveness...' he choked. 'Please... Of course hair will be 
enough, Enough... Where will I find them?' 

 'They will be delivered to you today, with the date and hour of birth. Master, I dont intend to 
distract you more. Return to your tower and begin observing the constelations.' 

 'May the Great Sun watch over Your Imperial...' 

 'Good, good. You are dismissed.' 

 Now it is our turn, thought Kalous. What awaits us? 

 'If any of you,' said the Emperor slowly 'tells even a word of what will be said here, will be parted 
in four. Vattier!' 

 'I am listening, Your Majesty.' 

 'How did this... Infanta get here? Who took care of it?' 

 'From the fortress Nastrog,' the leader of intelligence furrowed his brow. 'She was escorted by 
guards of your Majesty under the leadership...' 

 'Thats now what I am asking, cholera on you. How did she appear in Nastrog, in Verden? Who 
delivered her to the castle? Who commands it? The one, who sent the report? Some Godyvron?' 

 'Godyvron Pitcair,' immediately answered Vattier de Rideaus. 'He was of course, informed of the 
task, that Rience and count Cahir aep Caellach had. Three days after the events on Thanedd Island, 
two people appeared in Nastrog. To be exact, one human and one halfelf. They supposedly had orders 
from Rience and count Cahir and gave the infant to commander Godyvron.' 


 'Aha' smiled the Emperor, so that Kalous felt the frost on his back. 'Vilgefortz promised me he 
would catch Cirilla on Thanedd. Rience assured me the same. Cahir Mawr Dyffryn aep Ceallach had 
detailed orders. And look, three days after the incident on that mage island, they deliver Cirilla do 
Nastrog over Yarra. Not Vilgefortz, not Rience or Cahir, but a human and halfelf. Godyvron, of 
course did not think about imprisoning them?' 

 'No. Punish him for it, Your Majesty?' 

 'Not needed.' 

 Kalous swallowed his saliva. Emhyr was silent, rubbed his forehead, the giant brilliant in his ring 
shone like a star. The the Emperor lifted his head: 

 'Vattier.' 

 'Your Majesty?' 

 'Declare alert to all your men. I order the capture of Rience and Cahir. I presume, both are hiding 
in areas that are not under control of our forces, possibly with the Scoia'tael or elves of Enid 
Findabair. Both arrested, are to be immediately brought to Darn Rauch and be passed to torture and 
law.' 

 'What should we ask them, Your Majesty?' Vattier narrowed his eyes, pretending not to notice the 
sudden pallor of Seneschal Ceallach. 

 'Nothing, Later, once they soften up, I will interrogate them personally. Skellen!' 

 'Im listening.' 

 'As soon as that damn Xarthisius finds something out – of course if that bumbling kopromant is 
able to do what I ordered – then immediatelly organise a search for a person in the location that the 
mage pinpointed. You will get the description. It is possible, that the astrologer will mark a location 
under our rule. In that case, everyone will be at your disposal who lives in that area – all civilian and 
military apparatus. An affair of absolute priority. Do you understand?' 

 'Yes. Can I...' 

 'No you cannot. Sit and listen, Kalous. Xarthisius probably wont find anything out. The person, 
that we are looking for, is almost certainly in a foreign land and under magical protection, I bet on the 
same place as our mysteriously disappeared friend Vilgefortz of Roggeveen. Because of that, Skellen, 
you will prepare and train a special squad, which you will lead. You will choose the best people. They 
have to be prepared for anything – and they cannot be superstitous. That means they must not fear 
magic.' 

 Kalous raised his brows. 

 'Your new squad,' finished Emhyr, 'will be tasked to invade and captrure the, for now unknown, 
but surely perfectly hidden and guarded hideout of sorcerer Vilgefortz, our former friend and ally.' 

 'I understand,' said Kalous calmly. 'If I understand correctly, the person that we are looking for, if 
we find in that hideout, not even a hair can fall off the head.' 

 'You understand correctly.' 

 'And Vilgefortz?' 

 'Him can,' smiled cruely the Emperor. 'His hair must even fall – together with the head. That also 
applies to other sorcerers who will be in his hideout. Without exception.' 

 'I understand. Who will be tasked with finding Vilgefortz's hideout?' 

 You, Kalous.' 

 Stefan Skellen and Vattier de Rideaux exchanged short glances. Emhyr comfortably leaned back in 
his seat. 

 'Is everything clear? Then... What is the matter Ceallach?' 

 'Your Majesty...' said the Seneschal imploringly, who has not joined the converstaion until now. 
'I beg for pardon...' 

 'There is no pardon for traitors. There is no mercy for those, who did not fulfill my will.' 

 'Cahir... My son...' 

 'Your son,' narrowed Emhyr his eyes. 'I dont know yet, what your son caused. I want to believe 
that his guilt is only because of his stupidity and incapability and that its not conscious treason. If that 
is the truth, he will be beheaded, and not crushed on the wheel.' 

 'Your Majesty! Cahir is no traitor... Cahir would not...' 


 'Enough, Ceallach, not a word more. The guilty will be punished! They tried to deceive me and 
that is unforgivable. Vattier, Skellen, in an hour, you will return here for my signed instructions, 
orders and powers of Attorney, then immediately start carrying out your tasks. And one more thing: 
I dont have to, I hope, tell you that that girl, whom you saw in the throne room today, must be 
regarded as Cirilla, Princess of Cintra, Infanta of Rowan.By everyone. It is a national secret! 

 The present men all looked at the Emperor with astonishment. Deithwen Addan yn Carn aep 
Morvudd smiled: 

 You dont understand? Instead of the real Cirilla of Cintra, they delivered me some shade. Those 
traitors, probably assumed I dont know her. But I know the true Ciri. I would recognize her even in 
the end of the world and in the darkness of the underworld!' 

 

 


"The puzzling thing about the unicorn is that, although extremely timid and fearful of people, if it 
encounters a young maiden, who has not physically been with a man, in intimacy, it will approach 
her, kneel, and without fear place its head in her lap. It is said in past and ancient times that there 
were maidens who did not have real dealings with them. For many years they went without marriage 
and practiced chastity, so they could serve as decoys for unicorn hunters. Soon, however it was 
learned that the unicorns would only approach maidens that were young. Being a wise beast, the 
unicorn inevitably understood that those that remained a virgin were suspicious and unnatural." 

Physiologus. 

 

