Chapter Three 

 


Geralt had reasons to believe – and so he did – that the banquets of wizards looked different from 
feasts and revels of regular mortals. However, he didn't expect them to differ so drastically. 

Yennefer's offer to accompany her to the banquet at the eve of the convent was surprising, though 
not dumbstruckingly. It wasn't the first such offer. Before, when they were still living together, 
Yennefer desired his company on convents and gatherings. Back then, he refused. He was certain that 
wizards would treat him as a freak and a spectacle at best, and as an intruder and pariah at worst. 
Yennefer laughed his fears off, but didn't insist. Since in all other situations she could be so insisting 
that the whole house shook and creaked, it only served to reinforce Geralt's belief that his suspicions 
were true. 

This time he agreed. Without hesitation. The offer was made after a long, sincere and emotional 
talk. After the talk, which brought them back together, putting aside former conflicts, the talk which 
melted the ice of bitterness and pride. After the talk at Hirundum's dike, Geralt would agree to every, 
virtually every offer from Yennefer. He wouldn't refuse even if she proposed a visit to hell in order to 
drink a glass of boiling tar while having a small talk with a bunch of fiery demons. 

And there was Ciri, without whom that talk would have been impossible – that meeting wouldn't 
take place. Ciri, who, according to Codringher, was an object of interest to some wizard. Geralt hoped 
that his presence at the convent would provoke the wizard and force him to make a move. But he 
didn't say a word about this to Yennefer. 

They set off from Hirundum straight to Thanedd; him, her, Ciri and Dandelion. At first, they made 
a stop at the huge Loxia palace, at the south-eastern bottom of the mountain. The palace was bustling 
with guests and their companions, but Yennefer was able to quickly acquire lodgings. They stayed 
there one whole day. Geralt spent it talking with Ciri; Dandelion on running around gathering and 
sharing rumours; and the sorceress on picking clothes. And once the evening came, the witcher and 
Yennefer joined the colourful procession on the way to Aretuza – the banquet's destination. And now, 
in Aretuza, Geralt was experiencing wonder and surprise, even though he had promised himself not to. 

The giant hall was T-shaped. The longer part had windows, narrow and unbelievably high, almost 
reaching the ceiling. The ceiling was high as well. So high, that it was difficult to make sense of the 
murals which adorned it, least of all the gender of the nude figures which made a repeated appearance 
in the paintings. Windows were of stained glass, which must have cost a fortune, and yet the hall was 
uncomfortably cool. Geralt wondered why the candles hadn't gone out yet, but stopped after taking a 
closer look. The candelabras were magical, perhaps even illusory. Either way, they gave a lot of light, 
much more than regular candles. 

When they entered, close to a hundred guests were already entertaining themselves inside. The hall, 
in the witcher's opinion, could accommodate at least three times that, even if tables were to be placed 
in the middle, in the shape of a horseshoe, in accordance with the custom. But the traditional 
horseshoe was missing. It seemed that they were to feast while standing, wandering tirelessly 
alongside the walls decorated with tapestries, garlands and pennants fluttering in the wind. Under the 
tapestries and garlands stood rows of long tables with piles of fancy food on even more fancy plates 


between fancy flowery compositions and fancy ice figures. Upon taking a closer look, Geralt decided 
that there was more of the fancy than of the food. 

'No benches.' He stated grimly, smartening up the short, black, snug-fitting jacket Yennefer 
picked for him. The jacket of this kind was known as a doublet and it was the newest fashion trend. 
The witcher had no idea where its name originated from and didn't wish to find out. 

Yennefer didn't react. Geralt didn't expect her to, as he knew that the sorceress rarely reacted to 
statements of this sort. But it didn't discourage him. He kept whining. He just felt like whining for a 
bit. 

'No music. Cold as hell. Nowhere to sit. Are we supposed to eat while standing?' 

The sorceress gave him a look. 

'Indeed,' she said, surprisingly calm. 'We shall dine while standing. Furthermore, care to 
remember that longer stops near the tables with food are considered a breach of etiquette.' 

'I shall take note of that,' he murmured. 'Especially considering that there's not much to stop for, as 
I see.' 

'Unrestrained drinking is a huge breach of etiquette.' Yennefer continued to instruct him, 
dismissing his complaints. 'Avoiding small talk, in turn, is an inexcusable breach...' 

'And how much of a breach,' he interrupted, 'does that gaunt idiot in goofy pants make by pointing 
at me to his companions?' 

'A tiny one.' 

'What are we going to be doing in here, Yen?' 

'Walking around the hall, making acquaintances, complimenting, conversing... Stop messing up 
your hair.' 

'You didn't let me tie it up...' 

'Your ponytail looks pretentious. Come, take my hand and lets go forward. Standing near the 
entrance is a breach of etiquette.' 

They wandered around the hall, which was slowly filling with guests. Geralt was hungry as all hell 
but he quickly realised that Yennefer wasn't exaggerating. It was clear that the customs of the wizards 
truly demanded to eat and drink little and be casual. On top of that, every stop at the table required the 
use of etiquette. Someone always noticed, projected joy from the meeting and greeted with fake 
enthusiasm. After a mandatory kiss of air before the cheeks or an inadequately firm handshake, after 
fake smiles and even more fake compliments, came a short and wearisome talk about nothing in 
particular.. 

The witcher looked around, searching for familiar faces, mostly out of hope that he wasn't the only 
odd one out. Yennefer assured him that he wouldn't be and yet he didn't notice or couldn't recognize 
anyone else who didn't belong to the wizarding fraternity. 

The pages were going from guest to guest, offering wine. Yennefer didn't drink at all. The witcher 
wanted to, but couldn't. The doublet was uncomfortably tight beneath the arms. 

With an apt use of her arm, the sorceress dragged him away from the table and led him to the 
centre of the hall, which was at the same time the centre of everyone's attention. Resistance was 
useless. He knew what it was all about. It was a simple demonstration. 

Geralt knew what to expect, therefore he quietly withstood the looks of insatiable curiosity from 
the sorceresses and enigmatic smiles of the wizards. Despite Yennefer's insistence that the etiquette 
forbade the use of magic on such parties, he didn't believe that wizards could control themselves, 
especially with Yennefer provocatively bringing him out in the public's view. And he was right. He 
could feel the vibrations from his medallion as well as the sting of magical impulses. Some, women in 
particular, were tactlessly trying to read his mind. He prepared himself for that beforehand, so he 
knew how to respond. He looked at Yennefer at his side, at the black-white, sparkling with jewels 
Yennefer, with her raven hair and violet eyes, and the eavesdropping magicians were losing focus and 
retracting abashed, to his utter satisfaction. 

Yes, he said in his thoughts, yes, you are correct. There's only her, her at my side, here and now, 
and this is all that matters. Here and now. And where she was before, with whom she was, doesn't 
matter in the slightest. Now, she is with me, here, among you. With me and no one else. That's what 


I'm thinking about; thinking about her, all the time, feeling the scent of her perfume and the warmth of 
her body. And you can choke on the envy. 

The sorceress clasped at his arm and pressed herself to his side. 

'I appreciate that,' she murmured, leading him back to the tables. 'But avoid excessive ostentation, 
please.' 

'Do you wizards always take sincerity for ostentation? Is it because you doubt sincerity even when 
you see it in somebody's thoughts?' 

'Yes, it is.' 

'And yet, you appreciate it?' 

'Because I don't doubt you.' she clasped his arm even harder, then reached for a plate. 'Put some 
salmon on it for me, witcher. And some crabs.' 

'These crabs are from Poviss. They were probably fished out a month ago and days are blistering 
hot. Aren't you afraid...' 

'These crabs,' she cut in, 'have been crawling at bottom of the sea this morning. Teleportation is a 
wonderful invention.' 

'Indeed.' He agreed. 'Worth making available for the public, don't you think?' 

'We're working on it. Make haste, I'm hungry.' 

'I love you, Yen.' 

'I asked you to spare me the ostentation...' she stopped suddenly, jerked her head up, pulled her 
dark locks from her face and opened her violet eyes widely. 'Geralt! This is the first time you've said 
it!' 

'Impossible. You're fooling with me.' 

'I'm not. Up until now you've only ever said it in your thoughts, never aloud.' 

'Does it make any difference?' 

'A huge one.' 

'Yen...' 

'Don' speak with full mouth. I love you too. See what I meant? Gods, you're about to choke to 
death! Raise your arms, I'll pat your back. Take a deep breath.' 

'Yen...' 

'Breathe, breathe, it will pass.' 

'Yen!' 

'Yes. My sincerity for yours.' 

'Do you feel well?' 

'I've been waiting for this.' She squeezed out lemon juice onto the salmon. 'It wouldn't be proper to 
react to confessions made in thoughts. I've heard the words, I could respond to them and I did. I feel 
very well.' 

'What happened?' 

'I'll tell you later. Eat. The salmon's delicious, I swear on the Power, truly delicious.' 

'Can I kiss you? Here, now, in front of everybody?' 

'No.' 

'Yennefer!' a dark-haired sorceress freed her arm from her companion and came up to them. 'So 
you've decided to come after all? Oh, how wonderful! I haven't seen you in ages!' 

'Sabrina!' Yennefer smiled so brightly that that everyone, except Geralt, might have been fooled. 
'Dear! So good to see you!' 

The sorceresses embraced each other cautiously and kissed the air next to their diamond-onyx 
earrings. The earrings, in the shape of a grape bunch, were identical – the atmosphere cooled in an 
instant. 

'Geralt, allow me to introduce you to my schoolmate, Sabrina Glevissig of Ard Carraigh.' 

The witcher bowed down and kissed the offered hand. He had learned long ago that all sorceresses 
expected a kiss on the hand upon the greeting, a gesture worthy of a duchess at least. Sabrina 
Glevissig raised her head, her earrings jingling. Quietly, yet conspicuously. 


'I've always wanted to meet you, Geralt,' she smiled. Like all sorceresses, she didn't bother with 
honorifics or other courtesies. 'I'm glad to make acquaintance with you. You finally stopped hiding 
him from us, Yenna. I'm surprised how long it took you. There's nothing to be ashamed of.' 

'I think so too.' Yennefer replied casually, squinting her eyes a bit and ostensibly brushed her hair 
aside, revealing her earring a bit more. 'Beautiful bodice, Sabrina. Breathtaking even. Am I right, 
Geralt?' 

The witcher nodded. Sabrina's bodice, weaved of black chiffon, revealed absolutely everything that 
could be revealed, and there was quite a bit of that. Carmine skirt, with a silver belt and rose-shaped 
buckle, had a cut at the side with accordance to the latest fashion trend. The trend, however, required 
the cut to reach the thigh, while Sabrina's reached the hip. A nicely-shaped hip. 

'What news from Kaedwen?' asked Yennefer, pretending not to notice what Geralt was staring at. 
'Is your king, Henselt, still wasting money and time on hunting Squirrels in the forests? Is he still 
considering a punitive expedition against the elves in Dol Blathanna?' 

'Let us forget politics.' smiled Sabrina. The predatory look in her eyes and the slightly longer than 
regular nose resembled the classic portrayal of a witch. 'Tomorrow, at the convent, we will spend 
enough time discussing it. And listening to plenty of moralising About peaceful coexistence... About 
friendships... About the need to take a solid stance in the face of plans of our kings... What else are we 
going to hear about, Yennefer? What else do Vilgefortz and the Council have in store for us?' 

'Let us forget politics.' 

Sabrina Glevissig laughed and her earrings jingled loudly. 

'Rightly so. Let's wait until tomorrow. Tomorrow... Tomorrow everything will be explained. Ah, 
politics, never ending disputes... They have a terrible effect on beauty. Fortunately, I have a wonderful 
cream; trust me, darling, it works magic on wrinkles... Would you like a recipe?' 

'Thank you, dear, but I don't need it. Really.' 

'Ah, I know. I've always envied you skin back in school. Dear Gods, how many years has it been?' 

Yennefer pretended to greet back someone in the distance. Sabrina, on the other hand, smiled at the 
witcher and with one swift move presented everything the black chiffon didn't cover. Geralt 
swallowed, trying his hardest not to gape too much at the pink nipples, perfectly visible under the 
transparent cloth. He looked with fright at Yennefer. The sorceress was smiling but he knew her too 
well to be fooled. She was furious. 

'Oh, forgive me.' she said suddenly. 'I see Philippa; I have something urgent to discuss with her. 
After me, Geralt. Bye, Sabrina.' 

'Bye, Yenna.' Sabrina Glevissig looked the witcher straight in the eyes. 'Let me congratulate you 
on your... taste.' 

'Thank you.' Yennefer's voice was suspiciously cool. 'Thank you, my dear.' 

Philippa Eilhart was accompanied by Dijkstra. Geralt, who had met him before, had something to 
be thankful for – he finally saw a familiar face, someone who wasn't a wizard. But he was far from 
happy. 

'I'm happy to see you, Yenna.' Philippa kissed the air next to Yennefer's earring. 'Welcome, 
Geralt. You both know count Dijkstra, am I right?' 

'Who doesn't know him.' Yennefer nodded and offered Dijkstra her hand, which the spy kissed 
with reverence. 'I'm glad to meet you again, count.' 

'It's a pleasure,' stated the chief of king Visimir's secret service, 'for me as well, Yennefer. 
Especially in such a pleasant company. My deepest regards, mister Geralt...' 

Geralt, failing to ascertain that his regards were even deeper, shook hands with the man – or at least 
tried to, because the size of the hand was well above the norm and made the handshake tough to 
execute. 

The huge spy was dressed in a beige doublet, rather informally unbuttoned. It was plain that he felt 
at ease in it. 

'I thought I saw you talking with Sabrina?' said Philippa. 

'I did talk with her,' hissed Yennefer. 'Did you see what she's wearing? One must have neither 
taste nor shame to... Gods, she's years older than me... Nevermind. If only she had anything to show! 
Damn bitch!' 


'Was she trying to interrogate you? Everyone knows that she's spying for Henselt of Kaedwen.' 

'Really?' Yennefer feigned ignorance, which was rightly accepted as a great joke. 

'And how are you, count?' inquired Yennefer, once Philippa and Dijkstra finished laughing. 

'Quite well.' Visimir's spy bowed. 

'Considering,' smiled Philippa, 'that the count is here on a business trip, such statement is like a 
compliment. And, like all compliments, it's not very sincere. Barely a minute ago he confessed to me 
that he'd prefer a good familiar shadow, the smell of burning torches and roasted meet. He also misses 
the traditional table, soaked with beer and gravy, which he could bang on with his mug to the rhythm 
of indecent songs of the drunkards, and which he could gracefully pass out under to sleep among the 
dogs eating the scraps. And all my arguments proving the superiority of our feasting traditions were, 
believe it or not, dismissed.' 

'Is this so?' the witcher gave at the spy a much warmer look. 'And what arguments were those, if I 
may ask?' 

This time, his question was treated as a wonderful joke, as both sorceresses burst into laughter. 

'Ah, men,' sighed Philippa. 'You don't understand anything. How is it possible to impress 
everyone with your dress and body shape while in the dark and half-hidden by the table?' 

Geralt, unable to think of a retort, bowed. Yennefer squeezed his arm. 

'Ah,' she exclaimed. 'I see Triss Merigold over there. I have an urgent matter to discuss with her... 
Forgive us. See you later, Philippa. I'm sure we'll find enough time for chatting. Isn't that right, 
count?' 

'Certainly.' Dijkstra smiled and bowed deeply. 'I'm at your service, Yennefer. Just give me a nod.' 

They approached Triss, who was sparkling with shades of blue and aquamarine. Upon seeing them, 
Triss cut the talk with two male wizards, laughed brightly, hugged Yennefer and performed the ritual 
of air-kissing. Geralt took the offered hand but decided to act against the customs – he embraced the 
sorceress and kissed her soft, peachy cheek. Triss blushed lightly. 

The wizards introduced themselves. One was called Drithelm of Pont Vanis, the other was his 
brother Dethmold. Both in the service of Esterad of Kovir. Both very taciturn. Both hurriedly left. 

'You talked with Philippa and Dijkstra from Tretogor,' noted Triss, playing with a heart-shaped 
necklace of lapis lazuli, framed in silver and diamonds. 'You are, of course, aware who Dijkstra really 
is?' 

'We are,' confirmed Yennefer. 'He talked with you? Tried to interrogate you?' 

'He did,' the sorceress giggled. 'With significant caution. But Philippa was a great disturbance to 
him. I honestly thought they were in better terms.' 

'They're on great terms,' Yennefer warned her. 'Be careful, Triss. Don't let out one word about... 
you know whom.' 

'I know. I'll be careful. And by the way...' Triss lowered her voice. 'How is she? Will I be able to 
meet her?' 

'If you finally decide to teach in Aretuza,' Yennefer smiled, 'you'll be able to see her every day.' 

'Ah!' Triss' eyes widened. 'I see. Is Ciri...' 

'Quiet, Triss. We'll discuss it later. Tomorrow. After the council.' 

'Tomorrow?' Triss smiled in a very strange way. Yennefer frowned, but before she had a chance to 
inquire, a disturbance reigned in the hall. 

'They're here,' Triss coughed. 'They've finally arrived.' 

'Yes,' agreed Yennefer, moving her gaze from her friend's eyes. 'They're here. Geralt, you finally 
have an opportunity to meet the members of the Chapter and the Highest Council. If we have time, I'll 
introduce you to them, but for now it will be good if you get to know who's who.' 

The wizards stepped aside, bowing to the entering celebrities. The first one was an aged but robust 
man in surprisingly modest wool clothing. At his side was a tall woman with sharp features and dark, 
evenly combed hair. 

'This is Gerhart of Aelle, known as Hen Gedymdeith, the eldest of the living wizards,' explained 
Yennefer. 'The woman next to him is Tissaia de Vries. She's not much younger than Hen, but elixirs 
are not beneath her dignity.' 


Behind the pair was an attractive woman with very long, golden hair, wearing a lace dress in the 
colour of mignonette. 

'Francesca Findabair, known as Enid an Gleanna, 'Daisy of the Valley'. Don't gape at her, witcher. 
She's commonly considered to be the most beautiful woman in the world.' 

'She's a member of the Chapter?' he was surprised. 'She looks quite young. Also the work of 
magic?' 

'Not in her case. Francesca is a pure-blooded elf. Take note of her companion. It's Vilgefortz of 
Roggeveen. That one's young, indeed. But remarkably talented at the same time.' 

The term 'young', as Geralt was aware, was used in reference to the wizards up to the age of a 
hundred. Vilgefortz looked no more than thirty-five. He was tall and well-built, he wore a short 
doublet in the style of a knight but without the coat of arms. He was also hellishly good-looking. It 
was striking even with Francesca Findabair at his side, with her huge, doe-like eyes and astonishing 
beauty. 

'The short man next to Vilgefortz is Artaud Terranova.' explained Triss Merigold. 'The five of 
them compose the Chapter.' 

'And that woman with a strange face behind Vilgefortz?' 

'It's his assistant, Lydia van Bredevoort.' stated Yennefer coolly. 'A person of no importance, but 
staring at her face is a big breach of etiquette. You should look at the three men behind her, instead, 
these are the members of the Council. Fercart of Cidaris, Radcliffe of Oxenfurt and Carduin of Lan 
Exeter.' 

'This is the whole Council? I thought it was bigger than that.' 

'The Chapter has five members and the Council likewise. Philippa Eilhart is also in the Council.' 

'There's still one person missing,' he shook his head and Triss giggled. 

'You didn't tell him? You really don't know, Geralt?' 

'About what?' 

'Yennefer's a member of the Council. Since the battle of Sodden. You didn't want to brag, my 
dear?' 

'No, my dear,' the sorceress looked her friend in the eyes. 'Firstly, I don't like to brag. Secondly, I 
had no time to do so. I haven't seen Geralt for a very long time, there's a lot to catch up with. We have 
a long list of things to do and we will get things done in accordance to that list. 

'Of course,' Triss nodded meekly. 'Hmm... After such a long time... I understand. There's a lot to 
discuss...' 

'Discussions,' smiled Yennefer, giving the witcher a lust-filled look, 'are at the end of the list. At 
the very end, Triss.' 

The auburn-haired sorceress flinched and flushed. 

'I understand,' she repeated, playing with the heart-shaped jewel. 

'I'm glad to hear it. Geralt, bring us wine. No, not from this page. From the one further away.' 

He obeyed, recognizing the tone of her voice. While lifting the goblets from the page's plate, he 
discreetly watched the sorceresses. Yennefer spoke fast, though quietly, Triss listened with her head 
low. When he returned, Triss was gone. Yennefer didn't show any interest in the wine, so he put the 
unnecessary goblets on the table. 

'I hope you weren't too harsh?' he uttered. Yennefer's eyes glowed violet. 

'Don't try to fool me. You think I don't know about you two?' 

'If it's about that...' 

'Yes, that,' she cut. 'Don't make faces and refrain from making comments. But most of all, don't 
lie. I've known Triss for longer than I've known you, we like each other, we understand each other 
and we always will, regardless of any... incidents. Yet now I could sense she had some doubts. I 
dispelled them, that's all. Let's not divulge.' 

He didn't wish to. Yennefer brushed hair from her face. 

'I'll leave you alone for a while, I must speak with Tissaia and Francesca. Eat something, I can hear 
your stomach growling. And be cautious. Someone will surely try to interrogate you. Don't let them 
trick you, and be sure not to bring me shame.' 

'Rest assured.' 


'Geralt?' 

'Yes?' 

'A moment ago you asked if you could kiss me here, in front of everybody. Does the offer still 
stand?' 

'Yes.' 

'Mind the lip-gloss, please.' 

He threw a glance at the rest of the guests. They watched the kiss but unobtrusively. Philippa 
Eilhart, standing in the distance with a group of young wizards, winked at him and pretended to clap. 

Yennefer jerked her lips away from his and sighed. 

'Such a small thing and yet so satisfying,' she murmured. 'Well, I'll be going now. As for later, 
after the banquet... hmm...' 

'What is it?' 

'Don't eat any garlic, please.' 

Once she was gone, the witcher relinquished formalities, unbuttoned the doublet, drunk from both 
goblets and tried to make a do with food. Ineffectively. 

'Geralt.' 

'Count.' 

'Don't use titles with me,' Dijkstra winced. 'I'm no count. Visimir ordered me to introduce myself 
as one so as not to irk the magicians with my plebeian descend. Well, how do you fare with 
impressing everyone with the dress and body shape? And pretending to be having fun? 

'I don't need to pretend anything. I'm not on duty.' 

'That's interesting,' smiled the spy. 'But this only confirms the rumours that you are unique and 
exceptional. Because everyone else here is, in fact, on duty.' 

'Just as I feared,' Geralt didn't smile back. 'I expected to be exceptional. As in, completely out of 
place.' 

The spy inspected the plates, reached towards one and picked a big, green pod of a vegetable 
unknown to Geralt. 

'By the way,' he said, 'I must thank you for the Michelet brothers. Many in Redania sighed with 
relief after you butchered all four of them at the docks in Oxenfurt. I sure had a laugh when the medic 
called by the investigation, after having been shown the injuries, stated that the weapon used must 
have been a scythe arched edgewise.' 

Geralt declined to comment. Dijsktra bit on the second pod. 

'It's a pity,' he went on, chewing, 'that you didn't contact the mayor afterwards. There was a 
reward for them, dead or alive. Quite a sum.' 

'Too much trouble with the tax return,' the witcher also decided to try the green vegetable, which 
turned out to taste like a soaped celery. 'Besides, I needed to make haste because... Oh, but I must be 
boring you, Dijkstra, after all you know everything already.' 

'Let's not exaggerate,' grinned the spy. 'Surely not everything. Where from, besides?' 

'From Philippa Eilhart's mouth, for one.' 

'Reports, stories, rumours. I must hear them out, such is my job. But my job also requires of me to 
sieve them all through a very dense mesh. Recently, for example, I've heard the news of someone 
killing the infamous Professor and his two comrades. Everything took place in a tavern in Anchor. 
The person responsible for that also didn't bother to seek the reward.' 

Geralt shrugged. 

'Rumours. Sieve them through a dense mesh and not much will be left.' 

'I don't need to. I know exactly what will be left. Most of the time, what is left is an attempt of 
deliberate misinformation. Speaking of which, how's little Cirilla, the poor, sickly girl who died of 
dysentery? In good health, I hope?' 

'Cease while you're at it, Dijkstra,' replied the witcher coldly, looking the spy in the eyes. 'I know 
you're here on duty, but don't get too eager.' 

The spy snickered. Two passing sorceresses gave them looks of confusion. And curiosity. 

'King Visimir,' explained Dijkstra, 'pays me extra for every uncovered secret. Eagerness secures 
my future. You may find it funny, but I have a wife and children.' 


'I see nothing funny about that. Work for securing your family's future, but not at my expense, if I 
may ask. This hall, it seems, doesn't lack in secrets.' 

'Not exactly. The whole Aretuza is a one big riddle. Surely, you've noticed? Something's up, 
Geralt. And I'm not talking about the candelabra.' 

'I don't understand.' 

'I do believe it. I don't understand either. But I truly wish to. Wouldn't you? Ah, sorry. You 
probably know everything already, don't you? From your charming Yennefer of Vengerberg, that is. 
And to think that there used to be time when I, too, learned things from the charming Yennefer. But, 
oh, how long has it been?' 

'I honestly don't know what you're going on about, Dijkstra. Could you speak your mind more 
clearly? Try. But not if it's a part of your duty. Forgive me, but I'm not going to work on your extra 
pay.' 

'You think I want to deceive you?' the spy pulled a face. 'Trick you into providing me with 
information? You're hurting me, Geralt. I'm merely curious if you notice, in this hall, the same 
patterns I do.' 

'What patterns do you see?' 

'Aren't you surprised by the complete absence of the crowned heads at this convent?' 

'Not one bit,' Geralt managed to pierce a marinated olive onto a stick. 'The kings likely prefer the 
traditional kind of feasts, at the table, which they can gracefully pass out under in the morning. 
Moreover...' 

'What?' Dijkstra devoured four olives he unashamedly picked from the plate with the use of 
fingers. 

'Moreover,' the witcher pointed at the crowd, 'the kings need not bother. They sent an army of 
spies in their stead. Those in the fraternity, and those excluded from it. Probably so that they would 
find out what is up.' 

Dijkstra spit out the olive pips, picked up a long fork and started poking around a crystal salad-
bowl. 

'And Vilgefortz,' he noticed, 'took a great care not to omit a single spy. He has all royal spies on 
one plate. Why would Vilgefortz need to gather all spies on one plate, I wonder?' 

'I have no idea. And I don't care. I told you I'm off duty. I'm, so to speak, beyond the plate.' 

Visimir's spy fished a small octopus out of the bowl and studied it with revulsion. 

'They eat it,' he shook his head with false compassion, then turned back to Geralt. 

'Listen carefully, witcher,' he uttered quietly. 'Your conviction to your impartiality, your 
conviction that you don't care about anything and don't need to care... It frustrates me and forces me to 
gamble. You like to gamble?' 

'What do you mean?' 

'I'm proposing a wager,' Dijkstra raised the fork with the octopus. 'I'm betting that in the course of 
the following hour, Vilgefortz will ask for a talk with you. I'm betting that during this talk he will 
prove to you that you are not impartial and that you are, in fact, on his plate. If I'm wrong, then I'll eat 
this shit in your full view, with the tentacles and all. Do you accept the wager?' 

'What will I have to eat, if I lose?' 

'Nothing,' Dijkstra looked around quickly. 'If you lose, you will recount Vilgefortz's speech to 
me.' 

The witcher was silent for a while, looking calmly at the spy. 

'Excuse me, count,' he said finally. 'Thank you for the chat. It was very informative.' Dijkstra was 
disturbed. 

'So much...' 

'So much.' Geralt cut him off. 'Goodbye.' 

The spy shrugged, dropped the octopus back in the bowl, turned and walked away. Geralt didn't 
watch him leave. He moved to another table, led by a desire to try some of the huge, pinkish-white 
shrimps, mounting to the silver plate among lettuce and limes. They seemed tasty, but feeling the 
curious stares cast at him, he wanted to eat the crustaceans in a dignified manner, in accordance with 
etiquette. He approached the shrimps ostensibly slowly, plucking appetizers from other plates. 


At the second table stood Sabrina Glevissig engaged in a conversation with a red-haired sorceress. 
The red-haired one had a white skirt and a white georgette bodice. The bodice, like Sabrina's, was also 
completely transparent, but it had some strategically placed embroideries. The embroideries, Geralt 
noticed, had an interesting quality: they covered and revealed alternatively. 

The sorceresses talked while stuffing themselves with slices of lobster in mayonnaise. They spoke 
quietly and in Elder Speech. Although they weren't looking at him, they were clearly discussing him. 
He strained his sensitive witcher hearing discreetly, while pretending to be busy with the shrimp. 

'...with Yennefer?' repeated the red-head, playing with a pearl necklace bound around her neck so 
tightly that it resembled a collar. 'Are you kidding me, Sabrina?' 

'Not at all,' denied Sabrina Glevissig. 'You won't believe it, but it's been going on for several 
years. I'm surprised -- how can he stand that harpy.' 

'What's so surprising? She cast a spell on him - keeps him charmed. How many times have I done 
that myself?' 

'He's a witcher. They cannot be charmed. Not for so long, at least.' 

'In that case, it must be love,' wistfully sighed the red-head. 'And love is blind.' 

'He is the blind one,' grimaced Sabrina. 'Would you believe, Marti, that she had the audacity to 
introduce me as her schoolmate? Bloede pest, she's years older than me... Nevermind. I'm serious, 
she's hellishly possessive of this witcher. The little Merigold just smiled at him and this hag cussed 
her and chased her off. And even now... just look at her. She's standing there with Francesca but she 
doesn't take her eyes off him.' 

'She's scared,' giggled the red-head, 'that we'll steal him from her, if only for one night. How about 
it, Sabrina? Shall we give it a try? The man's attractive, so unlike those uppity snobs of ours, with 
their complexes and complaints...' 

'Speak lower, Marti,' hissed Sabrina. 'Stop gaping and flashing your teeth at him. Yennefer is 
watching us. Keep class. You want to seduce him? It would be tactless.' 

'Hmm, you're right,' agreed Marti. 'But what if he suddenly came up to us with the proposition?' 

'If so,' Sabrina threw a predatory look at the witcher, 'then I would offer myself in the blink of an 
eye, even if we were to do it on a rock.' 

'And I would do the same,' giggled Marti, 'even on a hedgehog.' 

Staring at the tablecloth, the witcher hid his face behind the shrimps and cabbage leaves, glad that 
the mutation of his blood vessels disabled blushing. 

'Witcher Geralt?' 

He swallowed the shrimp and turned around. A wizard with familiar features smiled slightly, 
touching the embroidered lapels of his violet doublet. 

'Dorregaray of Vole. We know each other. We've met...' 

'I remember. Forgive me, I didn't recognize you at first. I'm glad to see you...' 

The wizard smiled a bit wider, taking two goblets from the page's plate. 

'I've been watching you for some time,' he admitted, offering Geralt one of the goblets. 'You said 
that to everyone Yennefer introduced you to. Is it a deceit or just a non-critical approach?' 

'Politeness.' 

'For them?' Dorregaray pointed at the crowd 'Trust me, they're not worth it. They're a conceited, 
envious, mendacious bunch; they won't appreciate your politeness and may even take it for a sarcasm. 
With them, witcher, one needs to converse in their own way, basely, arrogantly, rudely; you may even 
impress them then. Will you have a drink with me?' 

'The swill served here?' smiled Geralt pleasantly, 'With all distaste. But if it suits you... I shall 
force myself.' 

Sabrina and Marti, eavesdropping from behind their table, burst into laughter. Dorregaray glared 
daggers at them, turned and clinked their cups, with a sincere smile this time. 

'Point for you,' he acknowledged with ease. 'You learn fast. Curses, where have you gained such 
wit, witcher? On the roads you stride in search for dying species? To your health. You might not 
believe it, but you're one of the few here for whose health I honestly want to drink.' 

'Is this so?' Geralt took a sip, savouring the taste. 'Even despite the fact that I butcher dying 
species for a living?' 


'Don't gripe at my words,' the wizard patted his arm. 'The banquet has just started. You'll probably 
speak to more people, so you ought to save some of your glib remarks. As for your occupation... You, 
Geralt, have at least enough dignity not to keep trophies. But take a look around. Go ahead, forget the 
etiquette, they like to be stared at.' 

The witcher obediently fixed his gaze on Sabrina Glevissig's breasts. 

'Look closely.' Dorregaray grasped his sleeve, pointing at the passing sorceress. 'Shoes made of 
horned agama's leather. Have you noticed?' 

He nodded - insincerely, as he only took notice of what remained uncovered by the transparent 
tulle bodice. 

'Oh, and there we have a rock cobra,' the wizard correctly identified another pair of shoes parading 
through the hall. The fashion, which had recently shortened the dresses, helped him with the task. 
'And over there... white iguana. Salamander. Wyvern. Spectacled caiman. Basilisk... All of them, 
without exception, endangered species. Curses, why not stick to veal and pork leather?' 

'You're going on about leatherworking, Dorregaray, as always?' asked Philippa, approaching them. 
'About tanning and shoemaking? What a trivial and repulsive subject.' 

'Different strokes for different folks,' scowled the wizard. 'That's some delightful embroideries 
you have there, Philippa! Diamond ermine, if I'm not mistaken? Very dainty, indeed. You are, of 
course, aware that this species had been brought to extinction twenty years ago for its beautiful fur?' 

'Thirty years ago,' Philippa corrected him, stuffing herself with the leftover shrimps. 'I know, I 
know, the species would undoubtedly be brought back from extinction, had I ordered the milliner to 
embroid my dress with mops of tow. I have considered it. Unfortunately, the colours wouldn't match.' 

'Let's move to the other table,' proposed the witcher. 'I saw a decent bowl of caviar. And since 
lake sturgeons are also close to extinction, we ought to make haste.' 

'Caviar in your company? I've been dreaming of this,' Philippa winked, slid her arm under his, 
smelling of cinnamon and nard. 'Let's make haste, then. Will you keep us company, Dorregaray? No? 
See you later, then; have fun.' 

The wizard snorted and turned around. Sabrina Glevissing and her red-haired friend watched them 
leave with looks more poisonous than the venom of endangered cobras. 

'Dorregaray,' whispered Philippa, unashamedly pressing herself to Geralt's side, 'is a spy for king 
Ethain of Cidaris. Stay vigilant. The talk about reptiles and fur is a prelude to interrogation. And 
Sabrina Glevissig was pricking up her ears...' 

'...because she's spying for Henselt of Kaedven,' he finished for her. 'I know, you've mentioned it 
before. And that ginger one, her friend...' 

'She's dyeing her hair. Don't you have eyes? It's Marti Sodergren.' 

'Whom is she spying for?' 

'Marti?' Philippa laughed, her teeth flashing from behind spicy red lips. 'For nobody. Marti's not 
interested in politics.' 

'Outrageous. I had the impression that everyone here is a spy.' 

'Many are,' the sorceress winked. 'But not all. Not Marti Sodergren. Marti is a healer. And a 
nymphomaniac. Ah, damn it, look! The caviar's been eaten! Every last grain! Someone's licked the 
bowl! What shall we do now?' 

'Now,' Geralt smiled innocently, 'you will announce that something's up. You'll tell me that I need 
to shed neutrality and make a choice. You will propose a wager. I cannot even imagine what my prize 
could be if I win. But I know what I will have to do if I lose.' 

Philippa Eilhart was silent for a long while, not taking her eyes off him. 

'I should have known,' she said quietly. 'Dijkstra lost it. He gave you an offer. Even though I told 
him about your contempt for spies.' 

'I have no contempt for spies. I have contempt for spying. And for the contempt in itself. Don't 
propose any wagers, Philippa. I also feel that something's up. And let it be. I'm not involved and I 
don't care.' 

'You've already said it once. In Oxenfurt.' 

'I'm glad you remember. I hope you remember the circumstances as well?' 


'Perfectly. I didn't disclose to you the identity of Rience's master back then. I let him escape. Oh, 
how mad at me you were...' 

'That's an understatement.' 

'Now it's time to make amends. I'll give you Rience tomorrow. Don't interrupt, don't make faces. 
This is no wager. It's a promise, and I keep my promises. No questions, please. Wait till tomorrow. 
Now we shall concentrate on caviar and trivial talk.' 

'There's no caviar.' 

'Give me a moment.' 

She looked around, moved her hand and whispered a spell. The silver vessel, shaped like a fish in 
motion, immediately filled with roe of the endangered lake sturgeon. The witcher smiled. 

'Can you satisfy hunger with an illusion?' 

'No. But it's enough for a craving. Try some.' 

'Hmm... Indeed... Seems more tasty than the real thing...' 

'And you won't gain weight,' the sorceress proudly exclaimed, squeezing lemon juice onto the next 
spoonful of caviar. 'Would you mind getting me a glass of white wine?' 

'Not at all. Philippa?' 

'I'm listening.' 

'Etiquette supposedly forbids the use of magic here. Wouldn't it be more appropriate to conjure up 
an illusion of taste alone? Just a sensory illusion? I'm sure you could...' 

'Of course I could,' Philippa Eilhart looked at him through the glass. 'The construction of such a 
spell would be easier than the construction of a flail. But sticking to a sensory illusion would rid us of 
the pleasure provided by the act of eating. The process, the movement, the gestures... The talk 
accompanying it, the eye contact... Allow me to entertain you with a humorous comparison, will 
you?' 

'I'm laughing already.' 

'I could conjure up an orgasm too.' 

Before the witcher regained speech, they were approached by a short, slim sorceress with long, 
straight, fair hair. He recognized her right away – it was the lady in shoes made of horned agama's 
leather and green, tulle bodice which didn't even hide a detail as tiny as the small spot above her left 
breast. 

'Forgive me,' she said, 'but I must interrupt your flirting. Philippa, Radcliffe and Dethmold are 
asking for few minutes of your time. It's urgent.' 

'Well, if so, then I will go. Bye, Geralt. We shall flirt another time!' 

'Aha!' the blonde confronted him with her eyes. 'Geralt. The witcher Yennefer is crazy about? I've 
been watching you and wondering who the hell might you be. I was truly bothered by it!' 

'I know that feeling,' he remarked, smiling politely. 'I'm experiencing it right now.' 

'Excuse my blunder. I'm Keira Metz. Oh, it's caviar!' 

'Careful, it's an illusion.' 

'Devil take it, you're right!' the sorceress dropped the spoon as if it were a tail of some dangerous 
scorpion. 'Who could be so tactless... You? You can cast illusions of the fourth degree? You?' 

'Me,' he lied, never ceasing to smile. 'I'm a master magician, pretending to be a witcher in order to 
remain incognito. Did you really believe that Yennefer would fall for a simple witcher?' 

Keira Metz stared him in the eyes, scowling. 

On her neck was a medallion in the shape of an ankh cross, silver and lined with rhinestones. 

'Would you like some wine?' he offered to cut the uncomfortable silence. He feared that his joke 
wasn't received well. 

'No, thank you... colleague magician,' said Keira coldly. 'I don't drink. I cannot. I'm about to get 
pregnant tonight.' 

'With whom?' asked the passing dyed friend of Sabrina Glevissig, dressed in transparent georgette 
bodice with strategically placed embroideries. 'With whom?' she repeated, fluttering her eyelashes 
innocently. 

Keira turned around and looked her up from the white iguana shoes to the pearl tiara. 

'What business is it of yours?' 


'None at all. Occupational curiosity. Won't you introduce me to your companion, the famous 
Geralt of Rivia?' 

'With displeasure. But I know we won't be able to get rid of you otherwise. Geralt, this is Marti 
Sodergren, a healer. She specializes in aphrodisiacs.' 

'Must we speak of business? Oh, you left some caviar for me? How kind of you.' 

'Careful,' the witcher and Keira said in unison. 'It's an illusion.' 

'Indeed!' Marti Sodergren bent, wrinkling her nose, then reached for a cup and studied the traces of 
red lipstick. 'Philippa Eilhart, no surprises there. Who else would have the audacity? What a shrew. 
Did you know that she's spying for Visimir of Redania?' 

'And she's a nymphomaniac?' risked the witcher. Marti and Keira snorted at the same time. 

'Were you counting on it when you were coming onto her?' asked the healer. 'If so, then you 
should know that someone must have fed you false information. Men don't figure in Philippa's 
preferences anymore.' 

'Or maybe you're a woman?' Keira Metz puffed out her lips. 'Maybe you're only pretending to be a 
man, colleague master magician? To stay incognito? You know, Marti, he confessed to me a moment 
ago that he likes to pretend.' 

'He likes and he does,' Marti smiled maliciously. 'Right, Geralt? Not so long ago I saw you 
pretending to have bad hearing and not to know the Elder Speech.' 

'He has many flaws,' said Yennefer coldly, coming up to them and possessively clutching witcher's 
arm. 'He has nothing but flaws. You're wasting your time, girls.' 

'It seems so,' agreed Marti Sodergren, still grinning. 'We wish you fun. Come, Keira, let's go get a 
drink of something... lacking alcohol. Perhaps I will, too, decide on something tonight?' 

'Uff,' he sighed once they left. 'Great timing, Yen. Thank you.' 

'You're thanking me? Probably insincerely. In this hall there's a total of eleven women showing off 
their tits through transparent clothes. I left you for half an hour, only to catch you talking with two of 
them...' 

Yennefer stopped, staring at the fish-shaped dish. 

'... and eating an illusion,' she added. 'Oh, Geralt, Geralt. Come. There's an opportunity to 
introduce you to people who are worth it.' 

'Is one of those people Vilgefortz?' 

'How curious,' the sorceress squinted her eyes, 'that it's him you're asking about. Yes, Vilgefortz 
asked to meet you and speak with you. I must warn you that this talk may appear trivial and light-
hearted, but don't let it fool you. Vilgefortz is an experienced and intelligent player. I don't know what 
he wants from you, but stay vigilant.' 

'I will be,' he sighed. 'But I doubt that this experienced player of yours will be able to surprise me. 
Not after all the things I've gone through here. I've been apprehended by spies, drowned in dying 
reptiles and ermines. I've been fed non-existent caviar. Nymphomaniacs with no interest in men have 
doubted my manhood, threatened me with rape on a hedgehog, pregnancy and even an orgasm of the 
kind that does not require any movements. Ugh...' 

'Have you been drinking?' 

'Only a bit of white wine from Cidaris. But there was probably an aphrodisiac in it... Yen? After 
my talk with Vilgefortz can we return to Loxia?' 

'We won't go back to Loxia.' 

'What?' 

'I want to spend this night in Aretuza. With you. Aphrodisiac, you say? In the wine? Interesting...' 

 

*** 

 

'Oh my, oh my,' sighed Yennefer, stretching on the bed and laying her thigh onto the witcher's. 
'Oh my, Oh my, my. It's been so long since I've made love this way... So very long.' 

Geralt disentangled his fingers from her heir, but didn't reply. Firstly, because he feared the hidden 
provocation in her statement. Secondly, because he didn't want the words to wipe the taste of her 
pleasure from his lips. 


'It's been so long since I've made love with a man who would profess his love for me, and whom I 
would love back,' she murmured after a while, once it became clear that the witcher wasn't going to 
fall for the trick. 'I've almost forgotten what it feels like. Oh my, Oh my.' 

She arched her back even more, stretching her arms and clutching at the corners of the pillow, and 
the sight of her breasts basking in moonlight sent a shiver down his back. He embraced her and they 
lay motionlessly, silent and still in the afterglow. 

Shrill cries of cicadas could be heard from outside, as well as the faraway voices and laughs, 
indicating that the banquet was not yet over, despite the late hour. 

'Geralt?' 

'Yes, Yen?' 

'Tell me about it.' 

'About the talk with Vilgefortz? Now? I'll tell you in the morning.' 

'Now, please.' 

He stared at the little cabinet at the corner of the chamber. Books were piled on it, sketchbooks and 
other items left by one of the students temporarily evicted to Loxia. Supported by the books sat a 
plump ragdoll in a frilly dress, rumpled by the excessive hugging. She left her dolly, he thought to 
himself, to be spared ridicule in Loxia's dormitory. She left behind her beloved doll. And now she's 
probably unable to fall asleep without it. 

The doll's button-eyes stared back at him. He turned his gaze away. 

When Yennefer was introducing him to the Chapter, he watched the wizardly elite closely. Hen 
Gedymdeith gave him just a single, weary look – it was clear that the banquet had already managed to 
tire the elderly man. Artaud Terranova bowed slightly with a dubious grin, leading his gaze from him 
to Yennefer, but it quickly melted under the glares of other people present. The azure eyes of 
Francesca Findabair were impenetrable and hard like ice. The Daisy of The Valley smiled when they 
were introduced to each other. Her smile, beautiful as it was, had terrified the witcher. Tissaia de 
Vries, seemingly busy with constantly improving her cuffs and jewellery, smiled a lot less beautifully 
but considerably more warmly. It was Tissaia who initiated the talk first, recounting one of his 
chivalrous witcherly deeds, which he couldn't recall and which was probably made-up. 

And then Vilgefortz joined the discussion. Vilgefortz of Roggeveen, the wizard of impressive 
posture, magnificent beauty and sincere voice. Geralt knew that people with his looks were 
completely unpredictable. 

They spoke shortly, feeling the concerned looks directed at them. Yennefer's for the witcher. 
Vilgefortz, in turn, was gazed at by a sorceress with kind eyes who was constantly trying to hide the 
lower half of her face with a fan. They exchanged a few conventional comments, after which 
Vilgefortz proposed moving the talk to a more secluded place. Geralt was under the impression that 
Tissaia de Vries was the only person surprised by this. 

'Have you fallen asleep, Geralt?' urged Yennefer, breaking him out of his thoughts. 'You were 
about to recount to me your talk with Vilgefortz.' 

The doll was staring at him down from the cabinet. 

'Once we've entered the cloister,' he began, 'That girl with a strange face...' 

'Lydia van Bredevoort. Vilgefortz's assistant.' 

'Yes, right, you've mentioned it. The person of no importance. Well then, once we were in the 
cloister, said person of no importance stopped, looked at him and asked him something. Through the 
use of telepathy.' 

'It wasn't a breach. Lydia cannot use her voice.' 

'I thought so. Because Vilgefortz didn't answer in the manner. He said...' 

 

*** 

 

'Yes, Lydia, it's a great idea,' said Vilgefortz. 'Let's take a walk through the Gallery of Glory. 
You'll have the honour of taking a peek into the history of magic, Geralt of Rivia. I'm sure you know 
it well, but this time you'll see it visualised. If you're a connoisseur of art, it may terrify you. Most of 


these paintings were made by the enthusiastic students of Aretuza. Lydia, be so kind and let some 
light in this shadow.' 

Lydia van Bredevoort made a sign with her hand and the corridor became brighter in an instant. 

The first painting featured an ancient ship, tossed by the waves among the rocks outcropping from 
the whirling deep. At the prow stood a man in white robes, his head adorned by a halo. 

'The First Landing,' guessed the witcher. 

'Indeed,' confirmed Vilgefortz. 'Ship of the Exiles. John Bekker subdues the Power. He calms the 
waves, proving that magic need not be just evil and destructive, but can be used to save lives as well.' 

'Is this an authentic event?' 

'I doubt,' smiled the wizard. 'Most probably Bekker and the rest of the crew were throwing up over 
the brim. The Power was subdued only after the landing, which happened to be peaceful. Let's 
forward. Here you can see John Bekker again, forcing water out of stone near the first settlement. And 
there we have Bekker, surrounded by kneeling settlers, dispersing the clouds and stopping the storm 
from destroying the crops.' 

'And that one there? What event does it portray?' 

'The Finding of the Chosen. Bekker and Giambattista test the children of arriving settlers in order 
to find the Sources. Selected kids will be taken from their parents and brought to Mirthe, the first 
domicile of the wizards. You're looking at a historic moment. As you can see, all kids are scared, only 
that resolute brunette reaches to Giambattista with a trusting smile. This is the famous Agnes of 
Glanville, the first female wizard. The woman behind her is her mother. She looks quite sad, for some 
reason.' 

'And the scene with a gathering?' 

'Novigrad Union. Bekker, Giambattista and Monck make a truce with the chiefmen, priests and 
druids. Something to do with a pact of non-aggression and the separation of magic from the politics. 
Terribly corny. Let's go on. Here we have Geoffrey Monck setting off up the Pontar river, known at 
the time as Aevon y Pont ar Gwennelen, the Riven of Alabaster Bridges. Monck was sailing to Loc 
Muinne in order to convince the elven mages to school a group of children. You might be interested in 
the fact that among these children was a boy called Gerhart of Aelle. You've met him today. That boy 
is now known as Hen Gedymdeith.' 

'This particular scene,' the witcher looked at the wizard, 'Lacks in drama. After all, only a few 
years after Monck's successful expedition, the army of Marchal Raupenneck from Tretogor carried out 
a massacre of Loc Muinne and Est Haemlet, killing all elves regardless of age or gender. And so 
began a war, which ended with the slaughter in Shaerrawedd.' 

'Your admirable knowledge in history,' smiled Vilgefortz, 'ought to make you acknowledge the 
fact that none of the respectable wizards took part in this war. Therefore no student felt inspired to 
paint it. Let's continue.' 

'Very well. And what is this depiction? Ah, I know. It's Raffard the White ending the feud between 
kings and marking the end of the Six Years War. And over there, Raffard declines to accept the 
crown. Beautiful, noble gesture.' 

'You think so?' Vilgefortz cocked his head. 'Well, a gesture it was. However, Raffard did accept 
the post of a Royal Counsellor which put him the place of true ruler, as the king was retarded.' 

'The Gallery of Glory...' muttered the witcher, coming up to the next canvas. 'And here?' 

'The historic moment of the vocation of the first Chapter and the resolution of the Law. From the 
left: Herbert Stammelford, Aurora Henson, Ivo Richert, Agnes of Glanville, Geoffrey Monck and 
Radmir of Tor Carnedd. For the sake of accuracy, this painting also lacks in drama. Soon afterwards a 
very brutal war broke out, and all who opposed the Chapter and refused to follow the Law were 
slaughtered. Raffard the White, among others. But historical texts are silent about this, so as not to 
blemish the beautiful legend.' 

'And this one... Hmm... Yes, it was definitely painted by a student. Rather young one, too...' 

'Certainly. It's an allegory, at that. An allegory of the triumphing femininity, I presume. Air, Water, 
Earth and Fire. And the four famous sorceresses who mastered them. Agnes of Glanville, Aurora 
Henson, Nina Fioravanti and Klara Larissa de Winter. Look at the next, better-drawn painting. It's 
Klara Larissa again, opening the academy for girls. In the same building we're standing in right now. 
And the following portraits picture the most famous graduates of Aretuza. A long history of 
triumphing femineity and the subsequent feminization of the profession: Yanna of Murivel, Nora 
Wagner, her sister Augusta, Jada Glevissig, Leticia Charbonneau, Ilona Laux-Antille, Carla Demetia 
Crest, Yiolenta Suarez, April Wenhaver... And the only living one: Tissaia de Vries...' 

They went ahead. Lydia's silken dress whispered quietly as they walked, and its whisper held a hint 
of a dreadful secret. 

'And this one?' Geralt stopped. 'What is this terrifying scene?' 

'Martyrdom of the mage Radmir, skinned alive during Falka's rebellion. The background shows 
Mirthe, burned at Falka's order.' 

'For which Falka had been burned in turn. At the stake.' 

'It's a well-known fact. Temerian and Redanian children to this day play burning Falka at the eve 
of Saovine. Let's turn back a bit, so you'll see the other side of the gallery... I see you want to ask 
something. I'm listening.' 

'I'm wondering about the chronology. I know, of course, about the youth elixirs, but the paintings 
picturing people who are dead together with those who are still alive...' 

'In other words, you're surprised to have met Hen Gedymdeith and Tissaia de Vries but not Bekker, 
Agnes of Glanville, Stammelford or Nina Fioravanti?' 

'Not really. I know you're not immortal...' 

'What is death?' Vilgefortz cut in. 'To you?' 

'The end.' 

'The end of what?' 

'Existence. It seems that we've entered the philosophical field.' 

'Nature knows not the notion of philosophy, Geralt of Rivia. What we call philosophy is merely the 
funny and pathetic attempts at understanding Nature made by man. The result of such attempts is also 
called philosophy. It's as if the beetroot pondered the meaning of its existence, calling it an eternal and 
mysterious Conflict of Bulb and Leaves, and considering the rain to be an Inscrutable Motive Power. 
We, wizards, don't waste time on guessing what Nature is. We know what She is, because we are Her. 
Do you understand?' 

'I'm trying but speak slower, please. Don't forget that you're speaking to a beetroot.' 

'Have you ever wondered what happened when Bekker forced water out of the rock? It's said very 
simply: Bekker subdued the Power. He'd bound an element to his will. He'd reigned over Nature, 
dominated Her... What are your views towards women, Geralt?' 

'Excuse me?' 

Lydia von Bredevoort turned around with a whisper of silk, waiting for his answer. Geralt noticed 
in her arms a painting wrapped in paper. He had no idea where it came from, as Lydia hasn't been 
carrying anything a moment ago. The amulet on his neck gave soft vibrations. 

Vilgefortz was smiling. 

'I was asking,' he repeated, 'about your views towards the relations between a man and a woman.' 

'What part of these relations are you referring to?' 

'Do you think it's possible to bind a woman to your will? I am, of course, talking about real 
women, not girls. Is it possible to rule over a real woman? Conquer her? Force her to yield to you? 
And if so, then how? Answer me.' 

*** 

The ragdoll's button eyes were still fixed at them. Yennefer turned her gaze away. 
'You answered?' 
'I did.' 
'How?' 
'You know.' 

*** 

'You understand,' said Vilgefortz at last. 'And it seems like you've always understood. So you will 
also understand that once the concept of will and subjugation, of domination and submission, of male 
master and female slave, is gone and forgotten – only then we can truly achieve unity. An attachment 
and a bond. Mutual diffusion. And once you achieve this, death will no longer matter. There, in the 
banquet hall, John Bekker is present, as water which has once gushed out of the rock. Saying that 
Bekker has died is like calling water dead. Look at the next painting.' 

He did as he was told. 

'It's exquisite,' he said finally. Instantly he felt delicate vibrations from his amulet. 

'Lydia,' Vilgefortz smiled, 'Is thanking you for the appreciation. And I shall congratulate you on 
your taste. The art work depicts the meeting of Cregennan of Lod with Lara Dorren aep Shiadhal, the 
legendary lovers, forced apart and destroyed by the times of contempt. He was a wizard, she was an 
elf, one of the elite Aen Saevherne, the Knowing. What could have become the beginning of 
reconciliation, ended up as a tragedy.' 

'I know this story. I used to take it for a mere fairytale. What happened for real?' 

'That,' the wizard stated sombrely 'is a mystery to all. All, but for a chosen few. Lydia, hang your 
painting next to it. Geralt, you may admire Lydia's newest work of art. It's a portrait of Lara Dorren 
aep Shiadhal, based on an old miniature.' 

'My deepest regards,' the witcher bowed to Lydia van Bredevoort; his voice didn't tremble. 'It's 
truly a masterpiece.' 

His voice didn't change at all, despite Lara Dorren aep Shiadhal looking at him down from her 
portrait with Ciri's eyes.. 

*** 

'What happened next?' 
 'Lydia was in the gallery. We both went out to the terrace. And she laughed at my expense.' 

*** 

'Over there, Geralt. If you don't mind. Tread only on the dark tiles, please.' 

Below the sea roared, the island of Thanedd stood among the white foam of the surf. The waves 
crashed against the walls of Loxia, which were located just below them. Loxia sparkled with light, 
like Arethusa. Towering above them was the stone block Garstang which appeared to be black and 
dead. 

 'Tomorrow,' the wizard eyes followed the witcher 'member of the Chapter and of the Council will 
be wearing their traditional robes, you know the ones from the old engravings, black capes and 
pointed hats. Also we will carry staves and canes, we'll look similar to wizards and witches that scare 
children. It's a tradition. Accompanied by some other delegates, we head up to Garstang. There, in a 
room specially prepared we will debate. The rest will wait in Arethusa for us to return with our 
decisions.' 

 'The gathering in Garstang, in a small group, is also a tradition?' 

 'Absolutely. It is ancient and dictated by practical considerations. It happens that the deliberations 
of wizards there have been fairly stormy and reached a very active exchange of views. During one of 
these exchanges a ball of lightning damaged the hair and dress of Nina Fioravanti. Nina spent a year 
working to surround the walls of Garstang with magical aura blocking spells which were incredible 
strong. Since then, spells do not work in Garstang and the discussions run quietly. Especially when we 
remember to take away the knives of the disputants.' 

 'I understand. And this solitary tower, above Garstang at the very top. What is it? Some building of 
importance?' 

 'That is Tor Lara, the Tower of Seagulls. A ruin. Important? Probably yes.' 

 'Probably?' 

 The wizard leaned against the railing. 


 'According to Elvish traditions, Tor Lara is connected via some form of teleportation device with 
the enigmatic Tor Zireael, the Tower of the Swallow, which has not yet been found.' 

 'How? How is it you haven't succeeded in discovering the teleporter? I don't believe it.' 

 'You are correct. We discovered a portal, but it was necessary to block it. There were protests, 
everyone rushed to do experiments, each sorcerer wanted to become famous as the explorer of Zireael 
Tor, the mythical home of Elvish sages and wizards. The Portal, however is irreparably flawed and 
brings chaos. There were victims, so it was blocked. Let's go, Geralt, its getting cold. Careful. Step 
only on the dark tiles.' 

 'Why only on the dark?' 

 'These buildings are in ruins. Moisture, erosion, strong winds, salt air, all of it affects the walls 
terribly. Fixing them would cost a fortune, so we use illusions. Prestige, you know.' 

 'Not quite.' 

 The wizard raised his hand and the terrace disappeared. They were standing in front of an abyss, on 
a precipice which at the bottom were bristling teeth of rock bathed in foam. They were on a narrow 
belt of dark tiles arranged as a trapezoid between the porch of Arethusa and the pillars that supported 
the roof. 

 Geralt maintained his balance without effort. If he were a human, not a witcher, he would not have 
managed to keep it. But even he was surprised. His sudden movement did not escape the attention of 
the wizard, nor the look on his face. The wind buffeted the narrow catwalk, and carried the sound of 
waves from the abyss below. 

 'Not afraid of death.' Vilgefortz said with a smile. 'But you are afraid for her.' 

 

*** 

 The rag doll looked at him with its button eyes. 

 'He mocked you.' Yennefer murmured, hugging the witcher. 'There was no danger, surely he had 
you both wrapped in a levitation field. He wouldn't have risked it... What happened next?' 

 'We went to another wing of Arethusa. He led me into a large chamber, it was probably one of the 
teachers offices, maybe even the head. We sat at a table on which stood an hourglass. The sand was 
falling. I sensed the smell of perfume , I knew Lydia had been in the room before us...' 

 'And Vilgefortz?' 

 'He asked questions.' 

 

*** 

 

 'Why did you not become a wizard, Geralt? Did the Arts never attract you? Be honest.' 

 'I will. Yes they appealed to me.' 

 'So why not follow the voice of inclination?' 

 'I felt that it would be more reasonable to go with the voice of reason.' 

 'Meaning?' 

 'Years of work in the witcher's profession have taught me to measure the strength of intentions. 
You know, Vilgefortz I once knew a dwarf, who dreamed of becoming an elf. What do you think 
would have happened if he had followed the voice of inclination?' 

 'Was that supposed to be a comparison? A parallel? If so, it is completely inaccurate. A dwarf 
could never be an elf. Because his mother was never an elf.' 

 Geralt was silent for a long time. 

 'Well, yes,' he said finally. 'I could have guessed that. You've been digging around a bit in my 
resume. Can you tell me, for what purpose?' 

 'Maybe,' smiled the wizard slightly. 'I dream of a painting in the Gallery of Glory? The two of us, 
at the table, and a brass plate inscription reading: "Vilgefortz of Roggeveen's pact with Geralt of 
Rivia."' 


 'That would be an allegory,' said the witcher. 'With the title: "Knowledge trumps ignorance." I 
would prefer a more realistic picture, bearing the title: "Vilgefortz explains to Geralt what's going 
on."' 

 'Isn't it obvious?' 

 'No.' 

 'Have you forgotten? The painting that I dream of, hangs in the Gallery of Glory, they will look at 
it in future generations, and they will know perfectly well what is going on, what the event shows in 
the painting. Painted on the canvas, Vilgefortz and Geralt agree and forge a pact which as a result 
Geralt, not following the voice of inclination, but a true calling, finally enters the ranks of Sorcerers, 
putting behind his present life which is lacking in meaning and devoid of a future.' 

 'And to think,' said the witcher after a long moment of silence. 'I had believed that nothing could 
surprise me anymore. Believe me Vilgefortz, I will remember this banquet and its magical comedy of 
events for a long time. Surely it is worth a picture. With the Title: 'Geralt leaves the island of 
Thanedd, bursting with laughter.'' 

 'I do not understand,' the wizard bowed slightly, 'I am lost in thy flowery speeches and densely 
woven fancy words.' 

 'The cause of your misunderstanding is clear to me. We are too different to understand. You are a 
powerful wizard of the Chapter, who has attained oneness with nature. While I am a wanderer, a 
witcher, a mutant, who travels the world and kills monsters for money...' 

 'The flamboyance,' interrupted the wizard 'has been replaced by banalities.' 

 'We're too different.' Geralt did not let himself be interrupted. 'A small fact that my mother was, 
incidentally, a sorceress, cannot erase this difference. But just out of curiosity, who was your mother?' 

 'I have no idea.' Vilgefortz said calmly. 

 The witcher fell silent immediately. 

 'The Druid Circle in Kovir,' the wizard took a moment 'found me in the gutter in Lan Exeter. They 
took me in and educated me. As a druid, of course. You know what a druid is? They are tramps, that 
walk through the world and kneel before the sacred oaks.' 

 The witcher stayed silent. 

 'And then,' continued Vilgefortz 'during some druidic rituals my talents surfaced. Talents that 
clearly and without a doubt allowed them to determine my origins. I was conceived, of course, by 
accident, by two people, of whom at least one of them was a sorcerer.' 

 Geralt was silent. 

 'The druid who discovered my humble abilities, of course, had fortuitously met a sorcerer.' 
Vilgefortz calmly went on. 'And he generously offered me an education and development and the 
prospect of joining the Brotherhood of Sorcerers.' 

 'And you,' said the witcher hollowly 'accepted the offer.' 

 'No.' Vilgefortz voice became increasingly cold and unpleasant. 'I rejected it in a less than polite, 
even rude way. I unloaded all of my rage on him. I wanted him to feel guilty, him and all his magical 
brotherhood. Guilty, for the gutter in Lan Exeter, guilty for one or two rogue sorcerers. The sorcerer, it 
was clear, neither understood nor was he bothered by what I said then. He shrugged and walked away, 
thus marking himself like all of his brethren, insensitive, arrogant, bastards worthy of the highest 
contempt.' 

 Geralt remained silent. 

 'I was sick of the druids already.' continued Vilgefortz sincerely. 'So I left the sacred oak trees and 
went out into the world. I did many things. So I am ashamed of still to this day. I finally became a 
soldier for hire. My life unfolded as you can imagine, as a stereotype. A victorious soldier, a beaten 
soldier, a marauder, robber, rapist, murderer, and finally a fleeing fugitive to the end of the world from 
the noose. I ran away to the end of the world. And there, at the end of the world I met a woman. A 
Sorceress.' 

 'Be careful' the witcher whispered, his eyes narrowing. 'Be careful Vilgefortz that the search for 
similarities does not take you to far.' 

 'The similarities have already been completed.' The wizard did not drop his gaze. 'Since I did not 
know how to handle the feelings I harboured towards the woman. Neither did I understand her 


feelings as she tried to help me. I left. Because she was promiscuous, arrogant, angry, numb and cold. 
Because she was impossible to dominate and her dominance was humiliating. I left because I knew 
she cared about me just because of my intelligence, personality and this fascinating mystery blurred 
the fact that I was not a sorcerer and only a sorcerer favour was more than a night. I left because... 
Because she was like my mother. Suddenly I realized that what I felt for her was not love but a feeling 
far more complicated, powerful but difficult to identify: a mixture of fear, anger, rage, remorse and the 
need for atonement, guilt, loss and damage, a perverse need for suffering and punishment. What I felt 
for this woman was hate.' 

 Geralt was silent. Vilgefortz looked away. 

 'I left,' he continued after a moment. 'because I could not live with the emptiness, which has 
enveloped me. I suddenly realized that this is not the lack of the woman that was causing the void, but 
the lack of what I was feeling. A paradox right? I think I'll stop, you can guess the rest. I became a 
sorcerer. Out of hatred. And only then did I realize how stupid it was. I mistook reflected on the 
surface of a pond with the sky with stars at night time.' 

 'As you noticed the parallels between us were not quite parallel.' Geralt muttered. 'Despite 
appearances, we have little in common, Vilgefortz. What did you want to prove by telling me your 
story? That the path to magic mastery, thought twisted and difficult, is open to all? Even for, sorry for 
the parallels, bastards and foundlings, vagrants or witchers...' 

 'No' interrupted the wizard. 'I did not intend to argue that this route is available to all, because it is 
obvious and long since proven. It does not require either any evidence the fact that for some people 
there is simply no other way.' 

 'And so,' smiled the witcher. 'I have no way out? Do I have to sign the aforementioned agreement 
that I will become the subject of paintings and become a sorcerer? Just because of genetics? Wow. I 
know a little theory of heredity. My father, I learned with a little effort, was a vagabond, ignorant, 
mercenary adventurer. I have the advantage of paternal genes, not only maternal. The fact that I have a 
beard seems to confirm this.' 

 'Certainly.' The wizard grinned. 'The hourglass has dropped almost all its sand and I Vilgefortz of 
Roggeveen, master of magic, a member of the Chapter, Am still conversing with an ignorant 
mercenary the son of an ignorant, mercenary and vagabond. We talk about matters and issues, as we 
all know, are common topics of discussion and comments at the fires of ignorant mercenaries. Such 
things as genetics, for example. Where did you hear that word, my mercenary? From the school in the 
Ellander temple where they spell and write twenty-four runes? What made you decide to the read 
books where you can find these and other similar words? Where you honed your eloquence and 
rhetoric? And what where you doing? Trying to converse with vampires? My genetic vagabond, that 
Tissaia de Vries smiles at. My witcher, mercenary that fascinates Filippa Eilhart, so that both of her 
hands tremble. At the mention of, makes Triss Merigold blush. Not to mention Yennefer of 
Vengerberg.' 

 'Perhaps it is a good thing that they do not remember. There is so little sand left in the hourglass 
that you could almost count the grains. Do not paint any more pictures for me, Vilgefortz. Say what is 
going on. Tell me in simple words. Imagine sitting by the fire, two vagabonds, roasting a suckling pig, 
which they had just stolen, and unsuccessfully trying to get drunk from birch juice. It is a simple 
question. Answer. Vagabond to vagabond.' 

 'What is this simple question?' 

 'What pact do you propose? What arrangement have we entered into? Why do you want me in your 
boat, Vilgefortz? What cauldron, in which it seems to me, begins to boil? What's in the air here, apart 
from the chandeliers?' 

 'Hmm.' The wizard thought, or at least pretended to. 'The question is not simple, but I will try to 
answer. But not vagabond to vagabond. As a mercenary to mercenary like I was.' 

 'All right.' 

 'Then listen, comrade mercenary. Prepare for a good fucking. A terrible slaughter of life and death, 
no quarter will be given. Some will win; the others will be eaten by the crows. I counsel you, 
comrade, join with those who have the greater chance. Join with us. Join with the others, and I'll spit 
on you, because they have no chance, and you will die with them. No comrade, don't show me your 


grin here, I know what you mean. You want to say that you are neutral. That you and those you care 
about will just wait it out hiding in your mountain, Kaer Morhen. That is a bad idea, comrade. 
Everything you love is with us. If you do not join, you'll lose it all. And then the emptiness, 
nothingness and hatred will swallow you. Then the time of contempt, which is coming will destroy 
you. So be sensible and stand on the right side, when the time comes to choose. And the choice will 
come. You can believe me.' 

 'Incredible,' the witcher's took on a sinister smile, 'how bothered you all are by my neutrality. To 
what extent it makes me the object of proposals for pacts and agreements, offers of cooperation, 
instructions about the need to make choices and stand on the right side. Let's end this conversation 
Vilgefortz. You lose this time. In this game, I am not an equal partner. I see no possibility that we are 
both in the same picture in the Gallery of Glory. Especially in the battles.' 

 The sorcerer was silent. 

 'Arrange' continued Geralt, 'your chessboard, the king, the queen, the elephant and the tower, do 
not worry about me because on this chessboard I have as much importance as the dust that covers it. 
This is not my game. You say that I have to choose? I assure you you're wrong. I will not choose. I 
will adapt to whatever happens. I will adapt to what others choose, I've always done this.' 

 'You're a fatalist.' 

 'I am. Although it is still a word you should not know. Again, this is not my game.' 

 'Really?' Vilgefortz leaned across the table. 'In this game witcher, on the board is already a black 
horse, for good or bad you are joined by bonds of destiny. You know who I'm talking about, right? 
You do not want to lose her? Know there is only one way to do it so as not to lose.' 

 The witcher's eyes narrowed. 

 'What is it you want from the child?' 

 'There is only one way you can find that out.' 

 'I warn you. I will not let you hurt...' 

 'there is only one way you can do that. I have proposed such a way, Geralt of Rivia. Think about 
my proposal. You have all night. Think when you look to the sky. To the stars. Do not mistake them 
for those reflected on the surface of a pond. The hourglass has run out.' 

 

*** 

 

 'I fear for Ciri, Yen.' 

 'You shouldn't.' 

 'But...' 

 'Trust me.' She hugged him. 'Trust me, please. Don't worry about Vilgefortz. He is a player. He 
wanted to approach you, to provoke. He partially succeeded in this. But it doesn't matter. Ciri is under 
my care, and Arethusa is secure, She will be able to develop her abilities here, and not be disturbed. 
By anyone. As for being a sorceress, forget it. She has other talents. And is destined for other things. 
Believe me.' 

 'I believe you.' 

 'That's significant progress. And do not worry about Vilgefortz. Tomorrow will explain many 
things and solve many problems.' 

 Tomorrow, he thought. She's hiding something from me. And I'm afraid to ask. Codringher was 
right. I'm tangled in a nasty cabal. But now I have no way out. I'll have to wait for what tomorrow 
brings that apparently will explain everything. I have to trust her. I know something will happen. I 
will wait. And I will adapt to the situation. 

 He looked at the writing desk. 

 'Yen?' 

 'I'm here.' 

 'When you studied in Arethusa... when sleeping in rooms like this... did you have a doll without 
which you could not sleep?' 

 'No,' Yennefer stirred violently. 'I did not have a doll. Don't ask me that, Geralt. Please don't ask 
me.' 


 'Arethusa.' He whispered, looking around. 'Arethusa on the island of Thanedd. Her home. For so 
many years... When she comes out from here, she'll be a mature woman...' 

 'Stop. Don't think about it and don't talk about it. Instead...' 

 'What, Yen?' 

 'Make love to me.' 

 He embraced her. Touched. Found. Yennefer, in an incredible way was hard and soft at the same 
time, she sighed loudly. The words they said were broken, sighs and aspirations which disappeared in 
a hurry, ceased to have meaning and dispersed. So silent, focused on finding themselves on the search 
for truth. They were looking a long time, carefully and lovingly, fearing the sacrilege of haste, the 
lightness and neglect. They looked hard, intense and passionate. They looked carefully, fearing the 
sacrilege of the absence of finesse. 

 They found each other, they overcame fear and a moment later, they found the truth, which 
exploded under their eyelids, awesome, blindingly obvious, a groan tore at his mouth which was 
clenched in determination. He then shuddered and time froze, everything disappeared, and only 
became a functioning sense of touch. 

 An eternity passed, reality returned, and for the second time he shuddered and began to move 
slowly, awkwardly, like a big loaded wagon. Geralt looked out the window. The moon was in the sky 
but what happened a moment ago should have thrown it to the ground. 

 'Wow,' said Yennefer after a time, wiping tears from her cheeks with a slow movement. 

 They lay motionless between the disordered sheets, among tremors, between the warmth and the 
expiring happiness, among the silence that swirled around the indistinct darkness pregnant with the 
smell of the night and the voices of the cicadas. Geralt knew that in such moments as these sorceress 
telepathic abilities were heightened and very strong, he thought so intensely about on issues and 
beautiful things. The brightness of the rising sun. In the dawn mist hanging over a mountain lake. In 
crystalline waterfalls filled with jumping salmon, as bright as if made of molten silver. The warm 
drops of rain hitting the leaves of a rose bush in full bloom. 

 He thought of her. Yennefer smiled, listening to his thoughts. The smile trembled on her cheeks 
with the silver by the moon shadow on her eyelashes. 

 

*** 

 

'A house?' Yennefer asked suddenly. 'What house? Do you have a house? Do you wish to build a 
house? Ah... sorry. I should not...' 

 He was silent. He was angry with himself. Thinking to her had inadvertently allowed her to read the 
thoughts he had harboured about it. 

 'A beautiful dream.' Yennefer lightly stroked his arm. 'A house. A house built with your own 
hands and in the house you and me. You would raise horses and sheep, I would take care of the 
garden, food and Cardaria would weigh the wool that we would take to the market. From the orens 
that we would be given from the sale of the wool and various fruits of the earth we would buy 
everything we need, say a little copper kettle and an iron rake. Every so often we would visit Ciri with 
her husband and their three children, sometimes Triss Merigold would come and to be with us for a 
few days. We could grow old with dignity. And if I get bored at night you would play the bagpipes 
made with your own hands. Playing the bagpipes, as everyone knows is the best remedy for the 
blues.' 

 The witcher was silent. The sorceress coughed softly. 

 'Sorry,' he said at last. He raised himself on his elbow, leaned over and kissed her. She moved to 
rapidly embrace him. In silence. 

 'Say something.' 

 'I do not want to lose you, Yen' 

 'After all I have.' 

 'This night is over.' 

 'Everything ends.' 


 No, he thought. I do not want it to be so. I'm tired. Too tired to accept the prospect of principals, 
after which you have to start all over again. I wish... 

 'Do not talk.' With a quick movement Yennefer laid a finger on his lips. 'Do not tell me what you 
want or what you crave. Because I might not be able to fulfil your wishes and that would cause me 
pain.' 

 'And what do you want, Yen? What do you dream? 

 'Only about things that can be achieved.' 

 'What about me?' 

 'I already have you.' 

 He was silent for a long time. And waited for the moment she broke the silence. 

 'Geralt?' 

 'Mmm?' 

 'Make love to me, please.' 

 At first, they filled each other, both were full of fantasy and imagination, ideas, discoveries and new 
desires. As usual, it soon proved that it was both too much and too little. They understood at once and 
again proved their love. 

 When Geralt came to, the moon was still in place. Cicadas chirped loudly as if they would also like 
to fight fear and unrest on the basis of madness and passion. From a nearby window on the left wing 
of Arethusa someone hungry for sleep screamed and fumed bitterly, demanding silence. From the 
window across someone, apparently gifted with an artistic soul, enthusiastically applauded and 
shouted congratulations. 

 'Oh, Yen...' Whispered the witcher in shame. 

 'I had a reason...' she kissed him and them nestled her cheek into the pillow. 'I had a reason to 
scream, so I screamed. That should not be suppressed, it is unhealthy and unnatural. Hold me, if you 
can.' 

 

 


Teleporter of Lara, also known as, after the name of its discoverer Benavent's Portal. Located on the 
island of Thanedd on the top floor of the Tower of Gulls. Standing, periodically active. Principles of 
operation: not known. 

 

Destination: unknown, probably distorted as a result of spontaneous decay, possibly many branches 
and forks. 

 

Note: The teleporter is chaotic and deadly. Experiments absolutely prohibited. Do not allow the use of 
magic in the Tower of Gulls and the immediate area in particular, teleportation magic. The Chapter 
reviews all exceptional applications for permission to enter Tor Lara in order to visit the teleporter. 
The request must be justified by research work and specialization in this field. 

 

Bibliography: Geoffrey Monck, "The Magic of the Elder Folk", Immanuel Benavent, "Portal of Tor 
Lara", Nina Fioravanti "The Theory and Practice of Teleportation", Ransant Alvaro, "The Secret 
Gates." 

Prohibit (index of forbidden artefacts), Ars Magica, Ed. LVIII 

 

 

