Chapter Four 

 

 

 At first there was only chaos pulsing, sparkling, a cascade of images, a vortex, a spiral full of 
sounds and voices. Ciri saw a tower reaching to the heavens, on whose roof lightning danced. She 
heard the cry of a bird of prey and she was this bird. She flew with great speed, below her was a 
raging sea. She saw a small doll made from rags, and suddenly she was the doll wrapped a darkness 
that vibrated with the song of cicadas. She saw a large black and white cat, and suddenly she was the 
cat, around her was a dark house, with dark wood panelling, it smelled of candles and old books. She 
heard someone repeatedly say her name, summoning her. She saw a silver salmon leaping in a 
waterfall, heard the patter of rain hitting the leaves. And then she heard the strange, prolonged scream 
of Yennefer. And this cry awoke her, snatching her from the depths of timelessness and disorder. 

 Now, unsuccessfully trying to remember a dream, she heard the quiet sounds of a lute and flute, the 
jingle of a tambourine, singing and laughter. Dandelion and a group of vagrants who had accidently 
met were still having fun in the room down the hall. 

 Through the window, fell a ray of moonlight, brightening the darkness and giving the room in 
Loxia the appearance of a dream. Ciri threw the sheets aside. She was sweaty, her hair stuck to her 
forehead. In the evening she had trouble getting to sleep, a shortness of breath, even with the window 
open. She knew what the reason was. Before leaving with Geralt, Yennefer had isolated the room with 
a spell of protection. Although it was supposed to prevent anyone from entering, Ciri actually 
suspected that it was to keep her from leaving. She was a prisoner. Yennefer, though pleased with the 
meeting with Geralt, had not forgotten or forgiven her wild Hirundum getaway, thanks to which this 
meeting took place. 

 Meeting with Geralt alone had filled her with sadness and disappointment. The Witcher was 
taciturn, tense, anxious and clearly lying. Their conversations occurred at a fast pace and involved 
fragmented, broken and unfinished statements and questions. The Witcher's eyes and thoughts fled 
and disappeared into the distance. Ciri knew where. 

 The room down the hall became quieter and the sound of Dandelion singing and the lute strings 
where like a murmuring of a brook over stones. She recognised the melody, which the bard had been 
composing for several days. The ballad, Dandelion had boasted of several times, was entitled 
"Elusive" and would bring triumph to the poet at the annual tournament held for bards in the late 
autumn at the castle of Vartburg. Ciri listened attentively to the words. 

 Above wet rooftops flying, 

 Yellow water lilies swim, 

 But I at the end understand you, 


 If you would let me... 

 The sound of hooves, horsemen galloped in the night and the horizon glows with fires. A bird of 
prey screeches, spreading its wings and leaping into flight. Ciri again plunged into sleep, hearing 
someone repeatedly call her name. Once it was Geralt, once Yennefer, once Triss Merigold and finally 
a few times, a girl she did not know, thin, blonde and sad, looked at her from a the corner bound in 
brass miniatures. 

 The she saw the black and white cat, after a while she was the cat and watched with its eyes. All 
around her was a strange, dark house. She could see shelves full of large books, some candles 
illuminated the desktop, in front of it two men were bent over parchments. One of the men coughed 
and wiped his mouth with a handkerchief. The second, a dwarf with an enormous head, sat in a chair 
with wheels. He was missing both legs. 

 

*** 

 

 'Incredible...' Fenn sighed, running his eyes over the mouldy parchment. 'It's hard to believe... 
Where did you get these documents?' 

 'You would not believe me if I told you.' Codringher coughed. 'Do you now understand who 
Cirilla, Princess of Cintra, really is? A girl of the Old Blood... The last offshoot from that damn tree 
of hatred! The last branch and on it a poisonous apple...' 

 'The Old Blood... As far back as... Pavetta, Calanthe, Adalia, Elen, Fiona...' 

 'And Falka.' 

 'The gods, that's impossible! First, Falka did not have any children! Secondly, Fiona was the 
legitimate daughter of...' 

 'First, about Falka's youth, we know nothing. Second, do not make me laugh, Fenn. You know 
very well that the sound of the word "legal" causes me spasms of mirth. I believe in this document, 
because in my opinion it is authentic and speaks the truth. Fiona, Pavetta's great-grandmother was the 
daughter of Falka, this monster in human skin. Hell, I do not believe in those crazy divinations, 
prophecies and other crap, but when I remember Ithlinne's predictions...' 

 'Stained Blood?' 

 'Stained, tainted, cursed, it can be understood differently. And according to legend, if you 
remember, it was Falka who was cursed, because Lara Dorren aep Shiadhal cast a curse on her 
mother.' 

 'These are fairy tales, Codringher.' 

 'You're right, this is a fairy tale. But do you know when they are fairy tales no longer? The moment 
when someone starts to believe in them. And someone believed in the story of the Old Blood. 
Especially in the passage which says that an avenger will be born of Falka's blood that will destroy 
the old world, and on its ruins build a new one.' 

 'And this avenger would be Cirilla?' 

 'No. Not Cirilla. Her son.' 

 'And searching for Cirilla is...' 

 'Emhyr van Emreis, Emperor of Nilfgaard.' Ended Codringher in a cold tone. 'Do you understand 
now? Cirilla, regardless of her will, is to be mother to the heir to the throne. The Archduke will 
become the Archduke of Darkness, successor and avenger that devil Falka. The Holocaust, and the 
later reconstruction of the world is, I believe, to be run in a controlled and monitored manner.' 

 The cripple was silent a long time. 

 'Do you not think,' he said at last 'that we should tell Geralt about this? 

 'Geralt?' Codringher curled his lip. 'And who is he? Could it be by change that he naively told me 
that he is not working for profit? Oh, I think he is not working on his own behalf. He is acting for 
others. Unwittingly anyway. He pursues Rience, who is on a leash, but he doesn't feel the collar 
around his own neck. Why should I inform him? To help those who want to take possession of the 
goose who lays the golden eggs to blackmail or gain favour with Emhyr? No, Fenn. I'm not that 
stupid.' 

 'The Witcher is on a leash? Whose?' 


 'Think.' 

 'Damn!' 

 'A well-chosen word. The only person who has influence over him. In whom he trusts. But I do not 
trust her. And I never did. I am too going to get into this game.' 

 'It's a dangerous game, Codringher.' 

 'There are no safe games. There are only games that are worthwhile and others that are do not 
deserve it. Fenn, brother, do you not understand what has fallen into our hands? A goose that to us and 
nobody else will give us a huge egg, every last one of them gold...' 

 Codringher burst into a fit of coughing. When he removed the handkerchief from his lips it was 
speckled with blood. 

 'Gold will not cure you,' Fenn said, looking at his companion's handkerchief. 'And it will not give 
me back my legs...' 

 'Who knows?' 

 Someone knocked at the door. Fenn shifted uneasily in his wheelchair. 

 'Are you expecting someone, Codringher?' 

 'Yes. For people I'm sending to Thanedd. After the golden goose.' 

 

*** 

 

 'Do not open,' cried Ciri. 'Do not open the door! Behind it is death! Do not open the door!' 

 

*** 

 

 'I'm opening, I'm opening.' Codringher shouted, as he lifted the latch, after which he turned to the 
cat, who was merely meowing. 'Shut up, damned beast...' 

 He stopped. At the door were not those he was expecting. At the door were three people he did not 
know. 

 'Are you Mr Codringher?' 

 'The lord is gone on business.' The lawyer changed the tone of his voice to a slight squeak. 'I am 
the butler of my master, I am called Glomb, Mikael Glomb. What can I do for the noble lords?' 

 'Nothing,' said one of the individuals, a tall half-elf. 'Since your master is not here, we'll leave a 
letter and a message. Here's the letter.' 

 'I will deliver it reliably.' Codringher, well into his role as a bumbling servant, bowed humbly and 
reached out to pick up a bundle of scrolls connected by a red rope. 'And the message?' 

 The rope that held the scrolls unfolded like a snake to attack, lashing forward to tightly entwine his 
wrist. Tall gave a strong pull. Codringher lost his balance, flew forward, so as not to collapse on the 
half-elf, he leaned left placing his hand on the half-elf's chest. In this position he was not able to avoid 
the, which puncture him in the stomach. He shouted and pulled back, but the magic rope was still 
wrapped around his wrist. The half-elf wandered back towards him and stabbed him once again. This 
time Codringher hung onto the blade. 

 'Here is the message and greeting from Rience,' the tall half-elf hissed, tearing the dagger strongly 
upwards opening the lawyer like a fish. 'Go to hell, Codringher. Straight to hell.' 

 Codringher wheezed. He could feel the blade grinding and crunching his ribs and sternum. He fell 
to the ground, rolling into a ball. He wanted to scream, to warn Fenn, but only managed to screech and 
squawk which a immediately stifled by a wave of blood. 

 The tall half-elf stepped over the body, followed behind by the other two. They were human. 

 Fenn was not surprised. 

 Ringing like a chord, one of the minions fell back, struck by a steel ball in the middle of the 
forehead. Fenn moved away from the desktop, trying in vain to reload the arbalest with trembling 
hands. 

 Tall jumped towards him, with a strong kick, he overturned the chair. The dwarf rolled onto the 
papers scattered on the floor. Crawling helplessly with small arms and the stumps of his legs, 
resembling a spider that had had its legs torn off. The half-elf kicked the arbalest out of reach of Fenn. 


He quickly reviewed the documents that lay on the desktop without paying attention to the crippled 
man trying to crawl on the ground. His attention was caught by a small framed brass horn and 
miniature of a blonde girl. He picked it up and took it. 

 The second thug who had been examining the man hit by the ball from the arbalest approached. The 
half-elf raised his eyebrow questioningly. The thug shook his head. 

 The half-elf placed the miniature and some of the documents he took from the desk and put them in 
his breast pocket. He then took a bunch of quills from and inkwell and lit it from the candlestick. 
Rotating them cause the bundle to be well lit, after which he let it fall onto the desk, among the stacks 
of scroll which instantly burst into flames. 

 Fenn howled. 

 The tall half-elf removed from the table that was already burning, a rum bottle used to remove ink, 
went to the dwarf and spilled its contents over him. Fenn gave a sharp cry. The second thug pulled 
from a shelf a sheaf of papers and threw them over the cripple. The desk stood roaring with fire all the 
way to the roof. Another bottle, smaller, exploded with a bang, the ashes sprinkled the shelves. 
Papers, bundles and folders began to blacked and twist and stoked the fire. 

 Fenn screamed. 

 The half-elf was beside him holding a burning scroll. 

 Codringher's black and white cat sat on a nearby wall. In his bright yellow eyes reflected the fire 
that turned a pleasant night into a terrible parody of day. The surrounding area was filled with 
screams. Fire! Fire! Water! People were running towards the house. The cat froze, staring in 
amazement and contempt. These idiots were going there, towards the fiery pit that he barely managed 
to escape. 

 Turning around with indifference, the cat continued licking its paws stained with Codringher's 
blood. 

 

*** 

 

 Ciri woke up covered in sweat, her hands painfully clutching the sheets. All around her was silence 
and the soft darkness was pierced by a dagger of moonlight. 

 Fire. Fire. Blood. Nightmare... I do not remember anything, I do not remember... 

 She inhaled deeply the crisp night air. The shortness of breath was gone. She knew why. 

 The protection spells did not work. 

 Something has happened, Ciri thought. She jumped out of bed and dressed quickly. She strapped a 
dagger. She had no sword; Yennefer had removed it and left it in the care of Dandelion. The poet was 
probably asleep already, Loxia was quiet. Ciri was wondering if she should go and wake him up when 
she suddenly felt in her ears heavy beats and the rhythm of blood. 

 The bright beam of moonlight through the window became a road. At the end of the road, far away, 
there were doors. The doors opened and Yennefer appeared. 

 Come here. 

 Behind the sorceress opened another door. One after another, endlessly. In the gloom she could 
make out the black forms of columns. Or maybe they were statues... I'm dreaming, thought Ciri, I 
myself do not believe this. I'm dreaming. This is not a road, it is light, a streak of light. You cannot 
walk through the... 

 Come here. 

 She obeyed. 

 

*** 

 

 Were it not for the Witcher's foolish scruples, if not for his impractical rules, many of the later 
events would have had a completely different course. Many events would probably never even taken 
place. And then the history of the world would be different. 

 Bu the world's history unfolded as it unfolded, and the sole reason for this was that the Witcher had 
scruples. When he awoke at dawn and felt the need, he did what anyone would have done. He walked 


onto the balcony and peed in the pot of nasturtiums. Scruples. He dressed quietly so as not to wake 
Yennefer, who was fast asleep, motionless and hardly without breath. He left the dwelling and went 
into the garden. 

 The banquet was still going o, but judging by the sound, in a rudimentary form. The windows of the 
ballroom had a light still burning which filled the atrium and illuminated the clumps of peonies. The 
Witcher went a little further into the dense bushes and there stared at the shining sky, from the horizon 
appeared the first glowing purple streaks of dawn. 

 When he returned slowly, reflecting on important issues, his medallion stared shaking vigorously. 
He grabbed it with his hand and felt the vibrations across his entire body. There was no doubt. 
Someone had cast a spell in Aretuza. Geralt pricked up his ears and heard muffled screams and a 
banging clatter coming from the gallery in the left wing of the palace. 

 Any other would have turned around without hesitation and returned to their room pretending not to 
hear anything. And then, the history of the world would also have developed differently. But the 
Witcher had scruples and principles and was used to following foolish and unrealistic rules. 

 When he came running through the gallery and into the hallway, there the struggled continued. 
Some soldiers dressed in gray jackets were restraining a sorcerer who was lying quietly on the floor. 
Directing the soldiers was Dijkstra, head of the secret services of Vizimir king of Redania. Before 
Geralt could take any action, he was also restrained. Two other soldiers in gray pushed him against the 
wall while a third person held an iron triton to his chest . 

 All the soldiers on their chest had a medallion with the eagle of Redania. 

 'This is called "falling into the shit"' Dijkstra quietly explained, while he approached. 'And you, 
Witcher, seem to have a natural talent for getting into it. Stand still and try not to pay attention.' 

 He finally saw the sorcerer being held by the arms. It was Artaud Terranova, a member of the 
Chapter. 

 The light that allowed him to see the details came from a ball that hung over the head of Keira 
Metz, a sorceress that Geralt had spoken with that night at the banquet. He hardly recognised her. She 
had changed light tulle netting for rough masculine clothes and carried a dagger at her side. 

 'Cuff him.' She commanded briefly. In her hand jingled shackles made of bluish metal. 

 'Do not dare to put those on me!' Terranova cried. 'Don not dare, Metz! I am a member of the 
Chapter!' 

 'You were. Now you are an ordinary traitor. And you'll be treated like a traitor.' 

 'And you're a mangy bitch, you...' 

 Keira took a step forward; swaying slightly in the hips and with all her strength she slammed her 
fist into his face. The sorcerer's head whipped back so far that for a moment Geralt had the feeling 
that it was going to detach from his neck. Terranova was hanging limply from the hands that held him, 
with blood running from his nose and lips. 

 The Sorceress did not deliver another blow, but her hand was raised. The Witcher saw the flash of 
brass knuckles on her fingers. He was not surprised. Keira was tiny; such a blow could not have been 
given with only her bare fist. 

 Geralt did not move. The soldiers held him tightly, and the tips of the triton poke his chest. Geralt 
was not sure that if he moved he could get free. Had he even known what to do. 

 The soldiers put chains on the wrists of the sorcerer, which were placed behind his back. Terranova 
screamed, twisted, bent and tried to vomit. Geralt knew already, what kind of shackles they were. It 
was an alloy of iron and demeterium, a rare mineral, whose properties consisted of stifling magical 
abilities. This stifling accompanied rather unpleasant side effect for magicians. 

 Keira Metz raised her head, pushing aside the hair on her forehead. And then saw him. 

 'What is he doing here, damn it? How did he get here?' 

 'He put his nose,' Dijkstra replied impassively. 'Where he has a talent for putting in. What would 
you have me do with him?' 

 Keira growled and stamped several times on the floor with the heel of her boot. 

 'Keep an eye on him. I do not have the time now.' 


 She left quickly, behind her walked the Redanians, who dragged Terranova. The glowing ball 
hovered behind the sorceress, but dawn was already starting to shine. At a sign from Dijkstra, the 
soldiers released Geralt. The spy came and looked the Witcher in the eye. 

 'Keep absolute peace of mind.' 

 'What is happening here? What is...' 

 'And absolute silence.' 

 Keira Metz returned after a short time, not alone. She came accompanied with a sorcerer with hair 
the colour of flaxen that the previous day had been introduced to Geralt as Dethmold of Ban Ard. 
Upon seeing the Witcher, the sorcerer cursed and slammed his fist into his hand. 

 'Damn it! Is this the one whom took a liking to Yennefer?' 

 'This,' Keira confirmed. 'is Geralt of Rivia. The problem is that I do not know how he is with 
Yennefer...' 

 'I also do not know.' Dethmold shrugged. 'In any case, he is already involved in this. He has seen 
too much. Take him to Philippa, she can decide.' 

 'There is no need,' Dijkstra said sleepily. 'I can vouch for him. I'll take him to where he belongs.' 

 'Fine then.' Dethmold said. 'Because we do not have time. Come, Keira, up there things get more 
complicated...' 

 'Beware those who are angry.' The Redanian spy muttered, looking after those departing. 'A lack 
of skill, nothing else. A coup like all coups are like gazpacho. It should be eaten cold. Come on, 
Geralt. And remember, peacefully, with dignity, without any fuss. Do not make me regret not tying 
you in chains.' 

 'What is going on, Dijkstra?' 

 'Have you not guessed?' The spy walked beside him, three soldier hang behind them. 'Tell me 
honestly, Witcher, how did it happen that you came to be here?' 

 'I was afraid the nasturtium where drying up.' 

 'Geralt,' Dijkstra gave him an evil look. 'You are up to your neck in shit. And you are just keeping 
your mouth above the surface, but your legs do not reach the bottom. Someone is giving you a helping 
hand, risking that they might also fall in and drown. Then stop these stupid jokes. It was Yennefer 
who told you to come here, right?' 

 'No, Yennefer is still asleep in bed. Has this reassured you?' 

 The huge spy turned sharply, seized the Witcher by the shoulders and pinned him to the wall of the 
corridor. 

 'No, it has not reassured me, fucking idiot,' he yelled. 'Do you not understand, clown, that 
sorcerers honest and loyal to the kings do not sleep tonight? Have not even gotten into bed? Those 
who are sleeping in their beds are traitors bribed by Nilfgaard. Traitors who themselves have been 
preparing a coup, but for later. They did not know that there plans had been discovered we were 
warned of their intentions. And right now they are being pulled from their warm beds and being given 
a knuckle duster to the nose and their wrists are being put in demeterium shackles. The traitors are 
finished, understand? If you do not want to go down with them, stop pretending idiot! Where you 
recruited by Vilgefortz last night? Or were you recruited before by Yennefer? Speak? Hurry, because 
the shit has already started to reach your mouth!' 

 'Cold gazpacho, Dijkstra.' Geralt reminded him. 'Lead me to Philippa. Calmly, with dignity and no 
fuss.' 

 The spy let him go and took a step back. 

 'Come on,' he said coldly. 'Up these stairs. But this conversation is finished. I promise you that.' 

 

*** 

 

 Where the four corridors joined beneath a column that supported the roof, had a clarity that came 
from Lanterns and magic globes. Soldiers and sorcerers gathered here. Among the latter were 
members of the Council: Radcliffe and Sabrina Glevissig. Sabrina, like Keira Metz, was also wearing 
gray men's clothing. Geralt realised that the coup was taking place before eyes and could recognise 
the different factions by their uniforms. 


 Kneeling on the floor was Triss Merigold, bent over a body lying in a pool of blood. Geralt 
recognised Lydia van Bredevoort. He recognised her by her hair and silk dress. The face he would 
never have recognised, because it was no longer a face. It was a hideous, gruesome death's mask, with 
bared teeth gleaming through half of her check and the lower jaw was deformed, sunken, and badly 
swollen. 

 'Cover her.' Sabrina Glevissig said dully. 'When she died the illusion dispelled... Damn it, cover 
her with something.' 

 'What has happened, Radcliffe?' Triss asked, removing the hand from the hilt of the dagger stuck 
below Lydia's breastbone. 'How could this happen? It was to be done without deaths!' 

 'She attacked us.' The sorcerer muttered, bowing his head. 'When they took Vilgefortz they fell on 
us. There was an uproar... I myself do not know how... It is her own dagger.' 

 'Cover her face!' Sabrina turned sharply. Geralt saw her eyes gleam like charcoal. 

 'How did he get here?' 

 Triss jumped up quickly, and threw herself on the Witcher. Geralt saw her face before her hand. 
Then he saw a flash and went down softly into darkness. He felt hands on his neck and a violent jolt. 

 'Hold him, because he'll fall.' Triss's voice was unnatural, it sounded like it was feigning anger. 
She tugged at him again, so for the moment he found himself next to her. 

 'Forgive me,' he heard her quickly whisper. 'I had to.' 

 Dijkstra's men held him down. 

 He shook his head. He moved to his other senses. In the corridor there was movement, the air 
rippled, carried smells. And voices. Sabrina Glevissig cursing, trying to calm Triss. The soldiers, 
smelling like barracks dragged along the ground a dead body, the silk dress whispering. Blood. The 
smell of blood. And the smell of ozone. The scent of magic. Raised voices. Steps, the nervous tapping 
of heels. 

 'Hurry! This has been going on too long! We should already be in Garstang!' 

 Philippa Eilhart. Nervous. 

 'Sabrina, Marti Sodergren is faster. If necessary, get her out of bed. Something is wrong with Hen 
Gedymdeith. I think it's a heart attack. Have Marti address it. But do not tell her anything about what 
is going on. Triss, you have locate and then take Dorregaray, Carduin and Drithelm to Garstang.' 

 'Why?' 

 'They represent the kings. Let Ethain and Esterad be informed of our action and it consequences. It 
will bring... Triss, you have blood on your hands! Who?' 

 'Lydia.' 

 'Damn. When? How?' 

 'Does it matter how?' said a cold, calm voice. Tissaia de Vries. Her dress rustled. Tissaia was 
dressed in an evening gown, not a rebel uniform. Geralt listened but could not hear the clink of 
demeterium chains. 

 'You pretend to be affected?' Continued Tissaia. 'To be worried? When organising a revolt, when 
armed soldiers are entering in the night, you have to expect there will be casualties. Lydia is dead, 
Hen Gedymdeith is dying. I saw for a moment, Artaud, his face was butchered. How many more 
victims will there be Philippa Eilhart?' 

 'I do not know.' Philippa replied sharply. 'But I will not go back.' 

 'Of course. You do back off for anything.' 

 The atmosphere trembled, heels hit against the floor at a familiar rhythm. Philippa was approaching 
him. He remembered the nervous rhythm of her steps when, the day before they walked together 
around the room of Aretuza to feast on the caviar. He remembered the smell of cinnamon and 
spikenard. Now the smell was mixed with baking soda. Geralt did not think he would participate in 
any coup, but if he were involved, he didn't believe he would brush his teeth beforehand. 

 'He cannot see you Phil.' A seemingly sleepy Dijkstra said. 'He sees nothing and saw nothing. The 
one with the pretty hair has blinded him.' 

 He heard and felt the breath of Philippa, her every move, but shook his head awkwardly, feigning 
being perplexed. The Sorceress was not fooled. 


 'Do not pretend Geralt, Triss has darkened your eyes, but do not get your head removed. How is it 
you have appeared here?' 

 'I ran. Where is Yennefer?' 

 'Blessed are those that do not know.' Philippa's voice held no mockery. 'You will live longer. Say 
thank you to Triss. It was a weak spell, blindness, you will see again soon. And so you have not seen 
what may not be seen. Watch them, Dijkstra. I'll be back.' 

 Once again movement. Voices. The soprano sound of Keira Metz, the low nasal tone of Radcliffe. 
The tapping of soldiers boots. The raised voice of Tissaia de Vries. 

 'Let go of her! How could you? How could you do it?' 

 'She's a traitor!' said nasal, Radcliffe. 

 'I do not believe it' 

 'Blood is not water.' Philippa Eilhart said coldly. 'And Emperor Emhyr has promised the elves 
freedom. And an independent state of their own. And that was enough to immediately betray us.' 

 'Answer!' Tissaia de Vries said with emotion. 'Answer her, Enid!' 

 'Answer, Francesca.' 

 The clinking of demeterium shackles. And the lilting elvish accent of Francesca Findabair, the 
Daisy of the Valley, the most beautiful woman in the world. 

 'Me Va a Vort, Dh'oine. These N'aen and dice'n.' 

 'Is that enough for you, Tissaia?' said Philippa's voice, like a bark. 'Do you believe me now? You, 
me, we all are and have always been to her Dh'oine, human, which she being Aen Seidh has nothing 
to say to. And you, Fercart? What has Emhyr and Vilgefortz offered you to, to make you decide to 
betray us?' 

 'Go to hell, perverted slut.' 

 Geralt listened but did not hear the sound of the brass knuckles colliding with a jaw. Philippa had 
more control that Keira. Or did not have any brass knuckles. 

 'Radcliffe, take the traitors to Garstang! Dethmold, offer you arm to the great teacher de Vries. Go 
now. I will join you.' 

 Steps. The smell of cinnamon and spikenard. 

 'Dijkstra.' 

 'Here I am, Phil.' 

 'Your subordinates are not needed here. Have them return to Loxia.' 

 'Are you sure...?' 

 'To Loxia, Dijkstra!' 

 'At your service, noble lady.' The spy's voice was perceived mockery. 'The footmen will have 
already done their share. It is now the exclusive domain of sorcerers. And so I promptly removed 
myself from the beautiful eyes of your Highness. I did not expect gratitude for the assistance and 
participation in the coup but I'm sure your Highness will keep me in grateful memory.' 

 'Sorry, Sigismund. Thank you for your help.' 

 'Not at all, it has been a pleasure. Hey, Voymir, gather the troops. Five will be with me. Bring 
down the rest are to wait down below and embark on the Waterfall. Of course, in silence, on tiptoe, 
without noise or fuss. Use the side corridors. Off to Loxia's port and not a word! Off!' 

 You have not seen anything,' Philippa Eilhart said in a whisper to Geralt, the Witcher caught a 
whiff of cinnamon, spikenard and baking soda. 'You have not heard anything. You have never spoken 
to Vilgefortz. Dijkstra will lead you to Loxia. I will try to find you there when... When everything is 
over. I promised you something yesterday and I will keep my word.' 

 'And what about Yennefer?' 

 'He is obsessed.' Dijkstra returned, shuffling his feet. 'Yennefer, Yennefer... I get bored. Do not 
worry about him, Phil. There are more important issues. Did you find in Vilgefortz's belongings what 
you expected to find? 

 'Yes. Here, this is for you.' 

 'Oho!' The rustle of paper. 'Oho! Oho, oho! Beautiful! Duke Nitert. Excellent! Baron...' 

 'Discreetly, without names. And I ask of you, when you return to Tretogor, do not start 
immediately with executions. Do not induce and early scandal.' 


 'Do not be afraid. The big boys on this list, greedy for the gold of Nilfgaard are safe. For now. This 
will be my beloved marionette to pull the strings on. And then impose on them more strings... Out of 
curiosity, were there any other lists? Do Kaedwen, Temeria or Aedirn have traitors? I would be glad 
to take a look. Even half a glance...' 

 'I know you'd be happy. But it is none of your business. These lists have been given to Sabrina 
Glevissig and Radcliffe, they will know what to do with them. And now, goodbye. Hurry.' 

 'Phil.' 

 'I'm listening.' 

 'Restore the Witcher's sight. Let's not have him stumble on the stairs.' 

 

*** 

 

 In the ballroom of Aretuza the banquet continued, but had changed its form to something more 
traditional and intimate. Tables had been removed, sorcerers and witches had brought into the room 
sofas, chairs, and stools from who knows where, they sat on the and engaged in various amusements. 
Most of the diversions might have been considered tactless. A large group sat around a huge barrel, 
drinking, chatting and occasionally bursting into raucous laughter. Those that had long exercised the 
search for appetizers with silver forks, now shamelessly gnawed mutton ribs that they held in both 
hands. Some played cards with passion, contempt for those around them. Some slept. In one corner, a 
couple was kissing passionately and with the eagerness with which they did showed they were not 
going to confine it to kissing. 

 'Just look at them, Witcher.' Dijkstra leaned over the balustrade of the gallery, watching the 
sorcerers from a height. 'How they play happily, you'd think they were youths. Meanwhile, the 
Council has been pried and almost all of its members are on trial for treason for allying with 
Nilfgaard. Look at this park. Just seek a secluded corner, and before the end of a fuck, Vilgefortz will 
already be hanging from a rope. Ah, the party, a kiss and a flower...' 

 'Shut up, Dijkstra.' 

 

*** 

 

 The road to Loxia was a zigzagging stair leading down the slope of the mountain. Stairs laced with 
terraces decorated with poorly maintained hedges, flowerbeds and potted dry agaves. Dijkstra stopped 
at one of the terraces they had just passed and approached the wall, lined with the stone heads of 
chimeras, from which water poured out from between their teeth. The spy bent down and drank for a 
long time. 

 The Witcher came closer to the railings. The sea shone golden, the sky's colour was even more 
trashy that the painting in the Gallery of Glory. Down below he saw detachments of soldiers that had 
come from Aretuza and hurried to approach the harbor. They crossed over a bridge that cross to the 
shore through the cleft in the rock. 

 What suddenly caught his attention, was the lone colourful character. The figure was conspicuous 
because it was moving so quickly. And in the opposite direction that the Redanians. Up to Aretuza. 

 'Come.' Dijkstra , hurried him with a cough. 'He who rises early, the gods help.' 

 'If you are in such a hurry, go alone.' 

 'Well, of course,' sneered the spy. 'Then you can go back to the top and save your Yennefer. And 
fuck like drunken gnomes.' We go to Loxia, witcher. Do you have delusions or something? Do you 
think I pulled you out of Aretuza because I'm secretly in love with you? Of course not. You are out of 
there because I need you.' 

 'For what?' 

 'Are you pretending? Studying at Aretuza are a hundred ladies from the best families of Redanian. I 
cannot risk a conflict with the esteemed rector, Margarita Laux-Antille. The rector did not give me 
Cirilla, Princess of Cintra, who was brought to Thanedd by Yennefer. However, they will release her 
to you. When you ask her about it.' 

 'Where did you get this funny idea that I'm going to ask?' 


 'From the funny assumption that you want to ensure the safety of Cirilla. Under my protection, 
under the protection of King Vizimir, she will be safe. In Tretogor. On Thanedd it is not safe. Refrain 
from malicious comments. Yes, I know that initially the kings intentions were not exactly the cleanest 
in the world about the girl. But it has changed. It is now clear that Cirilla alive, healthy and safe can 
be, in the coming war, more valuable than ten heavy cavalry detachments. Dead she is not worth a 
damn.' 

 'Does Philippa Eilhart know what you intend?' 

 'She does not know. She does not even know that I know that the girl is in Loxia. My dear Phil lifts 
her head up high, but King Vizimir still gives the orders in Redanian. I will fulfil Vizimir's orders, the 
machinations of sorcerers give a shit. Cirilla will be out on the Waterfall and will set sail for Novigrad 
and then on to Tretogor. She will be safe. Do you believe me?' 

 The Witcher leaned over one of the heads of the chimeras and drank water from the monstrous 
maw. 

 'Do you believe me?' Dijkstra repeated, coming over to him. 

 Geralt straightened up, wiped his mouth with his hand and punched him straight in the jaw. The spy 
staggered, but did not fall. The nearest Redanian soldier leaped and tried to grab the Witcher, but he 
grabbed air instead, and immediately sat down, spitting blood and teeth. Then they all rushed at him. 
It created a crowded clutter of confusion and this is precisely what the Witcher wanted. 

 One Redanian had his face smashed into a stone chimera; the gushing water was immediately 
stained red. The second was punched in the windpipe, he double over as if he'd been hit in the 
genitals. A third was beaten in the eye with an elbow, and fell back groaning. Dijkstra grabbed the 
witcher in a bear hug, but Geralt hit him hard in the shin with his heel. The spy howled and comically 
hopped around on one leg. 

 Another soldier tried to hit the Witcher with a swordstaff, but it just whistled through the air. Geralt 
grabbed him by the elbow with one hand, the other by the wrist and spun him, knocking him to the 
ground into two others who were trying to rise. The soldier he was holding was strong and was not 
releasing the sword staff. Geralt tightened his grip and broke his hand with a snap. 

 Dijkstra, still limping on one leg, made for a triton with the intentions of nailing the Witcher to the 
wall between its three points. Geralt reached down and grabbed the swordstaff with both hands and 
applied a principle known to scholars as leverage. The spy, saw before his eyes the joints of the brick 
wall, as he was launched into the air but it was too late to avoid the blow to the crotch from the head 
of the chimera. 

 Geralt used the swordstaff to take down another of the soldiers, he then thrust the sword at the 
ground and with a blow from his boot broke it, shortening the shaft. He tested the blade, first by 
hitting Dijkstra in the back who was sitting astride the chimera's head, then by silencing the cries of 
the soldier with the broken hand. The seams had long ago been ripped on his doublet and the Witcher 
felt much better. 

 The last of the soldiers who were still standing attacked with a triton, thinking that its length gave 
him an advantage. Geralt hit him in the face and the soldier collapsed into a pot of agaves. Another 
Redanian, with extraordinary stubbornness, grabbed the Witcher's thigh and bit him painfully. The 
Witcher with a furious kick robbed the man of any possibility of biting. 

 Running up the stairs, gasping was Dandelion. When he saw what was happening he turned white 
as paper. 

 'Geralt!' he shouted after a moment. 'Ciri has disappeared! She's gone!' 

 'I was expecting this.' The Witcher hit one of the Redanians that did not want to stay down. 'But be 
thankful you did not wait, Dandelion. I told you yesterday that if something happened you were 
immediately to come to Aretuza. Did you bring me my sword? 

 'Both!' 

 'That sword is Ciri's, you idiot.' Geralt hit the soldier who was stirring in the agaves. 

 'I don't know anything about swords,' hissed the poet. 'By the gods, stop hitting them! Don't you 
see the eagle of Redania? These are King Vizimir's people! This is treason and rebellion, you could 
go to the dungeon...' 


 'To the gallows.' Said Dijkstra, drawing his dagger and approaching at a stagger. 'You are both 
going to the gallows...' 

 He could not say any more as he fell to all fours, felled by a blow to the side of the head by the 
shaft of the swordstaff. 

 'Breaking on the wheel,' Dandelion said grimly. 'Proceeded by being poked with hot tongs...' 

 The Witcher kicked the spy in the ribs. Dijkstra fell onto his side like a slaughtered elk. 

 'Dismemberment.' Said the poet. 

 'Stop it, Dandelion. Give me both swords. And get out of get quickly. Escape from the island. Run 
away as far as you can!' 

 'And you?' 

 'I'm going back to the top. I have to save Ciri... And Yennefer. Dijkstra, lie quietly and leave the 
dagger alone!' 

 'You will not get away with this,' the spy gasped. 'I will bring my... I will follow you...' 

 'No, you will go.' 

 'I will go. I have fifty men on the deck of Waterfall...' 

 'Is there a barber among any of them?' 

 'Why?' 

 Geralt went behind the spy, bent down, grabbed him by the foot, and twisted it sharply with great 
force. It cracked. Dijkstra screamed and fainted. Dandelion groaned as if it had been his own joint. 

 'What you do to me after this,' murmured the Witcher. 'I don't give a shit.' 

 

*** 

 

 At Aretuza it was quiet. In the ballroom only a few remained, not having the strength to make 
noise. Geralt avoided the room, not wanting to be seen. 

 Not without some effort he found the room where he had slept with Yennefer. The halls of the 
palace were a labyrinth, and all look alike. 

 The rag doll was watching him with its little button eyes. 

 He sat on the bed, and clutched his head in his hands. On the floor there was no blood. But hanging 
on the back of a chair was a black dress. Yennefer had changed. Into male attire, the uniform of the 
conspirators? Or dragged away in her underwear. In demeterium chains. 

 

*** 

 

 At a bay window sat the healer, Marti Sodergren. She lifted her head when she heard his footsteps. 
Her cheeks were wet with tears. 

 'Hen Gedymdeith is dead.' She said, her voice cracking. 'Heart attack. I could not do anything... 
Why did they call me so late? Sabrina struck me. I was struck in the face. Why? What has happened 
here?' 

 'Have you seen Yennefer?' 

 'No, I've not seen her. Leave me alone. I want to be alone.' 

 'Show me the shortest way to Garstang. Please.' 

 

*** 

 

 Aretuza consisted of three overgrown terraces, above the slope of the mountain was steep and 
inaccessible. On the slope stood Garstang. The foundation of the palace was a dark boulder, 
homogeneous, smooth, close to the rocks. Only the top floor gleamed with marble and stained glass 
windows, the sun shone golden on the gilded dome plates. 

 The paved road leading to Garstang and beyond, to the top, twisted around the mountain like a 
snake. There was, however, another way, a shortcut, stairs that connected the terraces, and just under 
Garstang they disappeared into a dark tunnel. Marti Sodergren pointed out to the Witcher just those 
stairs. 


 Beyond the tunnel was a bridge crossing an abyss. After the bridge the stairs climbed sharply 
upwards, twisting and disappearing behind a bend. The Witcher quickened his pace. 

 The balustrade of the staircase was decorated with statues of fauns and nymphs. The statues 
produced the impression of being alive. They moved. The Witcher's medallion began to strongly 
vibrate. 

 He rubbed his eyes. The apparent movement of the statues were that they changed appearance. The 
smooth stone was transformed into a porous and shapeless mass, eaten by salt and wind. They 
immediately returned to normal. 

 He knew what it meant. The illusion that masked Thanedd swayed, was falling apart. The bridge 
was also partly illusion. Through the leaky camouflage loomed a cliff and a waterfall crashing loudly 
against its background. 

 There were no dark tiles to indicate a safe path. He crossed the bridge slowly, watching every step, 
cursing in his mind the wasted time. When he found himself across the abyss, he heard the footsteps 
of a man running. 

 He recognised him immediately. From above, down the stair case, came running Dorregaray, the 
sorcerer in service to King Ethain of Cidaris. He recalled the words of Philippa Eilhart. All sorcerers 
representing neutral kings had been invited as observers to Garstang. But the way Dorregaray was 
peeling down the stairs suggested that the invitation had been withdrawn suddenly. 

 'Dorregaray!' 

 'Geralt?' Gasped the sorcerer. 'What are you doing here? Do not just stand there, run away! 
Quickly, down the stairs, to Aretuza.!' 

 'What happened?' 

 'Betrayal.' 

 'What?' 

 Dorregaray suddenly shuddered and coughed in a strange way, and immediately bent over and fell, 
directly into the Witcher. Before Geralt could grab him, he saw the shaft of an arrow with gray 
feathers sticking from his back. He staggered with the sorcerer in his arms and it saved his life, 
because a second identical arrow, instead of going through his throat, slammed into the stone and the 
ironically smiling face of a Faun, ripping of the nose and part of the cheek. The witcher let go of 
Dorregaray and ducked behind the balustrade of the stairs. The sorcerer fell on top of him. 

 There were two archers, and both had hats with squirrel tails. One was at the top of the stairs, 
staining his bow; the second was drawing his sword from its sheath and ran down the stairs, skipping 
several steps at a time. Geralt freed himself from Dorregaray and sprang up, while he drawing his 
sword. An arrow sang, the witcher stopped its singing by bouncing it off the tip of his sword quickly. 
The second elf was already closing, but seeing the arrow reflected by the sword, hesitated for a 
moment. But only for a moment. He threw himself at the witcher, his sword made the air moan with 
the swiftness of his cut. Geralt quickly sidestepped, so the blade of the elf slipped by his sword. The 
elf lost his balance, the witcher spun smoothly and delivered a blow to the side of his neck, just under 
the ear. Only once. It was enough. 

 The archer on the top of the stairs again tightened his bow but had no time to release the string. 
Geralt saw a flash, the elf cried out, threw up his hands and fell down, hitting the steps. The back of 
his jacket was on fire. 

 Running down the stairs was another sorcerer. At the sight of the witcher he stopped, raising his 
hands. Geralt wasted no time explaining, he fell flat on the ground, and the hiss of fiery lightning flew 
over him, smashing the Faun statue into fine dust. 

 'Stop,' he yelled. 'It's me, the witcher!' 

 'Damn it,' the sorcerer panted, approaching. Geralt could not remember meeting him at the 
banquet. 'I had mistaken you for one of those rogue elves... What about Dorregaray? Alive?' 

 'I think so...' 

 'Quick, to the other side of the bridge! 

 He gladly dragged Dorregaray, because in his haste he did not pay attention to the shaking and 
fading illusion. Nobody chased them, but despite this, the sorcerer raised his hand, shouted a spell and 
sent a lightning bolt to destroy the bridge. 


 'That should stop them.' He said. 

 The witcher wiped the blood flowing from Dorregaray's mouth. 

 'He has a punctured lung. Can you help him?' 

 'I can,' Marti Sodergren said with effort, climbing the stairs from Aretuza. 'What's going on, 
Carduin? Who shot him?' 

 'The Scoia'tael.' The sorcerer wiped his forehead with his sleeve. 'The is fighting in Garstang. 
Fucking gangs, each worse than the other Philippa by night put people in chains, along with 
Vilgefortz and Francesca Findabair, so Francesca introduced Squirrels to the island! And Tissaia de 
Vries... Damn, they have messed this up!' 

 'Speak clearly, Carduin!' 

 'I will not waste time chattering! I'm going to Loxia, there I'm immediately transporting to Kovir. 
And those there, in Garstang, can kill each other! It does not matter! We are at war! All this mess was 
engineered by Philippa to allow the kings to declare war on Nilfgaard! Meve of Lyria and Demavend 
of Aedirn provoked Nilfgaard! Do you understand that?' 

 'No,' said Geralt. 'I do not want to understand. Where is Yennefer?' 

 'Stop it!' screamed Marti Sodergren, bent over Dorregaray. 'Help me! Hold him! I cannot pull out 
the arrow!' 

 They helped her. Dorregaray groaned and shuddered, the stairs where also shaking. Geralt initially 
thought it was the magic of Marti's healing spells. But it was Garstang. Suddenly the stained glass 
windows exploded, flickering in the windows of the palace was fire and smoke. 

 'The battle continues.' Carduin clenched his teeth. 'They hard going hard, spell after spell...' 

 'Spells? In Garstang? But there is the magic blocking aura!' 

 'It is Tissaia's doing. She suddenly decided on which side to stand. She has removed the block, 
dissipating the aura and neutralizing the demeterium. Then everyone jumped at each other's throats! 
Vilgefortz and Terranova on one side, and Philippa and Sabrina on the other... The columns broke and 
the roof collapsed... And Francesca opened the entrance to the basement and then, there were these 
elven devils... We shouted that we were just neutral but Vilgefortz laughed. Before we could build a 
shield, Drithelm received an eye through the eye, then covered him like a hedgehog... I did not stay to 
await the development of the issue. Marti, do you have much left to do? We have to get out of here!' 

 'Dorregaray will not be able to walk.' The healer wiped her bloody hands on her white ball gown. 
'Teleport us Carduin.' 

 'Here? Are you crazy. Tor Lara is too close. Portal Lara produces emanations that affect all 
teleportation. No one can teleport from here!' 

 'He cannot walk! I have to stay with him...' 

 'Then stay!' Carduin stood. 'And have fun! I like living! I'm returning to Kovir! Kovir is neutral!' 

 'Wonderful.' The witcher spat, looking at the sorcerer who disappeared into the tunnel. 
'Camaraderie and solidarity! But I cannot stay with you, Marti. I have to go to Garstang. Your brother 
has destroyed this bridge. Is there another way?' 

 Marti Sodergren sniffed. Then lifted her head and nodded. 

 

*** 

 

 He was near the walls of Garstang when Keira Metz fell on his head. 

 The path indicated by the healer led through a hanging gardens of linked serpentine stairs. The 
stairs were thickly overgrown with ivy and honeysuckle, vegetation made it difficult to climb, but 
provided cover. He worked his way unnoticed to the same wall of the palace. While seeking entry, 
Keira fell on him, both collapsed into a blackthorn bush. 

 'I've broken a tooth,' The sorceress said sadly, lisping slightly. She was dishevelled, dirty, covered 
in plaster and soot and on her cheek was a large hematoma. 

 'I think I broke my leg,' she said, spitting blood. ' Is that you, witcher? I fell on you? How come?' 

 'I wonder, too.' 

 'Terranova kicked me out the window.' 

 'Can you get up?' 


 'No, I cannot.' 

 'I want to get inside. Unnoticed. Which way?' 

 'Are all witchers,' Keira spat again, she moaned, trying to get up on her elbows. 'crazy? The 
fighting continues in Garstang! It is so hot that even the stucco on the walls is melting! Are you 
looking for trouble?' 

 'No, I'm searching for Yennefer.' 

 'Ha!' Keira ceased her effort and lay on her back. 'I would like it if someone loved me so much. 
Take my hand.' 

 'Maybe another time. Now I have to hurry.' 

 'Take my hand, I say! I will show you the way into Garstang. I need to get this bastard Terranova. 
Well, what are you waiting for? You could not find the entrance, and if you did, you'd be finished off 
by the bastard elves... I cannot walk, but I'm still able to cast a few spells. If someone gets in our way, 
they'll regret it.' 

 She screamed when he lifted her. 

 'Sorry.' 

 'Never mind,' she surrounded his shoulders with her arm. 'It is this leg. You still smell like her 
perfume, you know? No, not that way. Turn around and go uphill. It is the second entry, on the side of 
Tor Lara. Maybe there are no elves... Auuu! Careful, dammit!' 

 'Sorry. How did the Scoia'tael get here?' 

 'They were in the basement. Thanedd is empty as a shell, below there is a great cavern, you can 
reach it by boat, if one knows the way. Someone had betrayed us.... Auuu! Careful! Don't shake me!' 

 'Sorry. So the Squirrels came by sea? When?' 

 'The gods know when. Maybe today, maybe a week ago? We were preparing for Vilgefortz and 
Vilgefortz for us. Vilgefortz, Francesca, Terranova and Fercart... We messed up badly. Philippa 
thought that they wanted to start a seizure of power in the Chapter, to exert influence over the kings... 
And then they were going to kill us during the conference... Geralt, I cannot stand it... Leg... Put me 
down for a moment. Auuuu!' 

 'Keira it is an open fracture. Blood is running down the leg.' 

 'Shut up and listen. Because it is about your Yennefer. We went to Garstang, to the Chamber. It has 
a magical lock, but the lock does not work on demeterium, we felt safe. Discussions began. Tissaia 
and the neutrals shouted at us, we yelled at them. And Vilgefortz remained silent and smiled...' 

 

*** 

 

 'I repeat, Vilgefortz is a traitor! He has partnered with Emhyr of Nilfgaard, pulled into a 
conspiracy! He broke the law, betrayed us and the kings...' 

 'Slowly Philippa. I know that the grace that surrounds you from Vizimir, means more to you than 
the solidarity of the Brotherhood. The same applies to you Sabrina, You play the same role in 
Kaedwen. Keira Metz and Triss Merigold represent the interests of Foltest of Temeria, Radcliffe is an 
active tool of Demavend of Aedirn...' 

 'What does this have to do with it, Tissaia?' 

 'The interests of kings do not necessarily coincide with ours. I know perfectly well what was going 
on. The kings began the extermination of the elves, and other non-humans. Maybe you, Philippa, you 
thing it is right. Maybe you, Radcliffe, you think it appropriate to assist Demavend's troops in a raid 
on Scoia'tael. But I am against it. And no wonder Enid Findabair is against you. But that still does not 
imply treason. Do not interrupt me! I know exactly what your kings planned, I know you want to start 
a war. Actions that could lead to the avoidance of war may constitute treason in the eyes of your 
Vizimir, but not mine. If you judge Vilgefortz and Francesca, also judge me!' 

 'What war are you talking about here? My king, Esterad of Kovir, will not support and aggressive 
action against the Nilfgaard Empire Kovir is and will remain neutral!' 

 'You are a member of the Council, Carduin, and ambassador to your king!' 

 'Look who's talking, Sabrina?' 


 'Enough!' Philippa banged her fists on the table. 'I will satisfy your curiosity, Carduin. You ask, 
who is preparing for war? Nilfgaard is preparing, it is them who plan to attack and destroy us. But 
Emhyr van Emreis remembers Sodden Hill, and this time he decided to protect himself, by enlisting 
sorcerers into the game. Therefore he made contact with Vilgefortz Roggeveen. He bought him, 
promising power and ambition. Yes, Tissaia. Vilgefortz, the hero of Sodden, is to become the 
governor and ruler of all the acquired North. It is Vilgefortz, assisted by Terranova and Fercart, who is 
to govern the provinces that arise in place of the kingdoms that are conquered, he will be the one 
shaking the Nilfgaardian stick upon the slaves that inhabit this country to work for the empire, and 
Francesca Findabair, Gleann an Enid, is to be queen of the Elves of the Free State. This will of course 
be a Nilfgaard protectorate, but the elves want simply from emperor Emhyr to be given a free hand to 
kill humans. And the elves want nothing with greater passion than to kill Dh'oine.' 

 'It is a heavy accusation. Therefore, the evidence will have to be just as weighty. But before you 
throw this evidence on the scales, Philippa Eilhart, be aware of my position. Evidence can be 
fabricated, actions and their motives can be interpreted. However the present facts do not change 
anything. You broke the unity and solidarity of the Brotherhood, Philippa Eilhart. You chained up 
members of the Chapter like thieves. Do not dare now to propose a place in the new Chapter your 
band of coup plotters plans to create and sell to the kings. Between us there is blood and death. Hen 
Gedymdeith's death. And the blood of Lydia van Bredevoort. With contempt you have spilled this 
blood. You were my best student, Philippa Eilhart. I've always been proud of you. But now I have 
only contempt for you. 

 

*** 

 

 Keira Metz was pale as parchment. 

 'For some time now,' she whispered. 'it has been quiet in Garstang. It is ending... they are chasing 
through the palace. It has five floors, seventy-six rooms and halls. This is where they chase...' 

 'You were talking about Yennefer. Hurry. I'm afraid you'll pass out.' 

 'About Yennefer? Ah, yes... Everything went our way, when suddenly Yennefer appeared. And 
introduce to the room the medium...' 

 'Who?' 

 'A girl, about fourteen years old. Ashen hair, big green eyes... Before we had time to contemplate it, 
the girl began to prophesy. She told about the events in Dol Angra. No one had any doubts she was 
telling the truth. She was in a trance, those in a trance don't lie.' 

 

*** 

 

 'Last night,' said the medium. 'an army with the banners of Lyria and the standards of Aedirn 
perpetrated an attack against the rule of Nilfgaard. They attacked Glevitzingen an outpost located in 
Dol Angra. A herald announced on behalf of King Demavend to the surrounding villages, from today, 
Aedirn assumes government over all the country. Then called people to take up arms against 
Nilfgaard...' 

 'Impossible! It is a hideous provocation!' 

 'How easily those words leave your mouth, Philippa Eilhart.' Tissaia de Vries said quietly. 'But do 
not worry, your cries have not interrupted the trance. Keep talking, girl.' 

 'Emperor Emhyr van Emreis gave the order to answer blow with blow. Nilfgaard armies have 
entered this morning at dawn Aedirn and Lyria.' 

 'So then,' smiled Tissaia. 'Our kings have shown themselves to be the intelligent, enlightened and 
peace-loving rules that they are. And some sorcerers have proven on whose side they are. To those 
who might have had the foresight avoided a predatory war they have been placed in demeterium 
chains and have absurd accusations levelled against them...' 

 'It is all a lie!' 


 'To hell with you all!' Sabrina Glevissig suddenly shouted. 'Philippa! What does all this mean? 
What does this trouble in Dol Angra mean? Did not establish that it shouldn't start so soon? Why had 
this fucking Demavend not stopped it? Why is this slut Meve...' 

 'Shut up, Sabrina!' 

 'Oh no, let her speak.' Tissaia de Vries raised her head. 'We speak of the Henselt's Kaedwen army 
concentrating on the border. We speak about the soldiers of Foltest of Temeria who surely now has 
his ships pouring in to the water that had been hidden in the forests of Yaruga . We speak of the 
special forces under the command of Vizimir of Redania next to the Pontar. Did you think, Philippa 
that we are deaf and blind?' 

 'This is nothing but a bloody provocation! King Vizimir...' 

 'King Vizimir,' the impassive voice of the ashen haired medium interrupted, 'was murdered last 
night. Killed by an assassin. Redania no longer has a king.' 

 'Redania has long had no king.' Tissaia de Vries stood. 'In Redania his majesty has been ruled by 
Philippa Eilhart, a worthy successor to Raffard the White. Willing to sacrifice tens of thousands of 
lives to achieve absolute power.' 

 'Do not listen!' Philippa cries. 'Do not listen to this medium! It is a tool, a mindless tool... Who do 
you server, Yennefer? Who commanded you to bring this monster here?' 

 'I did.' Tissaia de Vries said. 

 

*** 

 

 'What happened next? What happened to the girl? With Yennefer?' 

 'I don't know.' Keira closed her eyes. 'Tissaia suddenly lifted the blockade. 'With a spell. I've 
never seen anything like it... We were stunned and blocked, then she released Vilgefortz and the 
others... and Francesca opened the basement door and Garstang immediately started swarming with 
Scoia'tael. They were being lead by a monster in Nilfgaardian armour and a winged helmet. They 
were helped by a man with a scar on his face. He knew how to cast spells. And protected himself with 
magic...' 

 'Rience.' 

 'Maybe, I don't know. It was hot... The ceiling collapsed. Spells and arrows... a massacre... Among 
them Fercart was killed, among us Drithelm was killed, Radcliffe was killed, Marquard was killed, 
Rejean and Bianca d'Este... Triss Merigold was injured, Sabrina was wounded... When Tissaia saw 
the corpses she started to understand her error and tried to protect us, tried to restrain Vilgefortz and 
Terranova... Vilgefortz ridiculed and mocked her. Then he lost his mind and ran away. Oh, Tissaia... 
So many dead...' 

 'What about the girl and Yennefer?' 

 'I don't know.' The sorceress was drowning in coughing, spitting blood. She was breathing very 
slowly and with obvious effort. 'After one of the row of explosions I lost consciousness for a moment. 
The one with the scar and his elves had overpowered me. Terranova first kicked me, then threw me 
out the window.' 

 'It's not just your leg, Keira. You have broken ribs.' 

 'Don't leave me.' 

 'I have to. I'll be back for you.' 

 'Sure.' 

 

*** 

 

 At first there was only a chaos of amber, a dark pulse, a tangle of dark and light, a gibbering chorus 
of voices, which came from afar. Suddenly the voice gathered strength, exploding all around her in 
booms and noise. The light from the darkness became a fire that devoured carpets and tapestries, 
sheaves of sparks that seemed to pour from the walls, balustrades and columns that supported the roof. 

 Ciri choked from the smoke and realized that it was no longer a dream. 


 She tried to stand up, leaning on her hands. Her fingers touched something wet and she looked 
down. She was kneeling in a pool of blood. Next to her lay a dead body. The body of an elf. She 
recognized it instantly. 

 'Get up.' 

 Yennefer was at her side. She had a dagger in one hand. 

 'Lady Yennefer... Where are we? I don't remember anything...' 

 Swiftly, the sorceress grabbed her hand. 

 'I'm with you, Ciri.' 

 'Where are we? Why is everything burning? Who is this... this one here?' 

 'I told you once, centuries ago, that chaos stretches out its hand after you. Remember? No. You 
probably don't remember. The elf reached out his hand for you. I had to kill him with a dagger, 
because his superiors are hoping that some of us will reveal ourselves using magic. And I will, but I'm 
not yet fully recovered... Are you fully conscious?' 

 'Those sorcerers...' Ciri whispered. 'those in the large hall... What did I tell them? And why did I 
say it? I did not want to... But I had to say it! Why? Why, Lady Yennefer?' 

 'Silence, ugly one. I made a mistake. Nobody's perfect.' 

 From below came a roar followed by a shriek. 

 'Come on. Quickly. We do not have much time.' 

 They ran down the hallways. The smoke was getting thicker, strangled, chocked and blinded. The 
wall were shaking from the explosion. 

 'Ciri.' Yennefer stopped at an intersection of corridors and firmly squeezed the girl's hand. 'Listen 
to me now, listen carefully. I have to stay here. See those stairs? Go down them...' 

 'No! Don't leave me alone!' 

 'I have to. Again, go down those stairs. All the way down. There will be doors and behind them a 
long corridor. Down the hall there is a stable where a horse is saddled. Just one. Get it out and you 
jump on it. It is a well-trained horse, it serves the messengers of Loxia. He knows the way, simple 
spur him on. When in Loxia, look for Margarita and get under her protection. Do not swerve from it, 
not one step...' 

 'Lady Yennefer! No! I do not want to be alone!' 

 'Ciri,' the sorceress said softly. 'Once I told you everything I do is for your own good. Please trust 
me. Run.' 

 Ciri was already on the stairs when she heard Yennefer's voice again. The sorceress stood beside a 
pillar, leaning her forehead against it. 

 'I love you, my daughter,' she said, her voice muffled. 'Run.' 

 

*** 

 

 They surrounded her in the middle of the stairs. Below her two elves with squirrel tails in their 
caps, above a man dress in black. Ciri without hesitation jumped the railing and fled down a side 
corridor. They ran after her. She was faster and would have escaped without effort if it were not for 
the corridor ending at a window. 

 She looked through. Along the wall ran a stone ledge, perhaps two spans thick. Ciri went through 
the window her feet on the ledge. She turned from the window, her back to the wall. In the distance 
shone the sea. 

 An elf leaned out the window. He had light hair and green eyes, a velvet scarf was ties around his 
neck. Ciri quickly turned away, moving to another window. But the man in the dark suit appeared. He 
had dark terrible eyes and a red scar across his cheek. 

 'We have you, girl!' 

 She looked down. There, very far away, she could see the courtyard. Above the courtyard, about ten 
feet below the parapet on which she stood, there was a bridge linking two galleries. Only it was not a 
bridge. It was the ruins of a bridge. A narrow stone walkway with the remains of a railing. 

 'What are you waiting for?' cried the man with the scar. 'Get out there and get her!' 


 'The fair-haired elf with caution made his way out onto the ledge, he pressed his back against the 
wall. He reached out his hand. He was close. 

 Ciri swallowed. The stone bridge, the remainder of the bridge was not narrower that the swing at 
Kaer Morhen, and she had jumped dozens of times onto the swing, she could absorb the jump and 
keep her balance. But the witchers swing was only four feet off the ground, while below the stone 
bridge an abyss that the courtyard tiles seemed smaller than a hand. 

 She jumped, landed, stumbled but kept her balance by clinging to the broken railing. With safe 
passage she had reached the gallery. She could not contain herself, she turned around and showed the 
pursuers a bent elbow, a gesture which had been taught to her by the dwarf, Yarpin Zigrin. Scarface 
swore loudly. 

 ''Jump!' He shouted at the blond elf standing on the ledge. 'Jump after her!' 

 'You've gone mad, Rience.' said the elf with a cold voice. 'Jump yourself, if you want her.' 

 

*** 

 

 Luck, as usual, did not accompany her for long. When she left the gallery and slipped behind the 
wall, among the blackthorns, they grabbed her. He grabbed her and pinned her in an incredibly strong 
hug, a slightly short, overweight man with a swollen nose and a cut lip. 

 'Come here,' he whispered. 'Come here, little lamb.' 

 Ciri writhed and screamed, he has clamped his hands on her shoulders suddenly producing a 
paroxysm of crippling pain. The man laughed. 

 'Do not wiggle, grey sparrow, or you'll burn your feathers. Let me take a look. Let's see what it is 
that makes you worth so much to Emhyr van Emreis, Emperor of Nilfgaard. And for Vilgefortz.' 

 Ciri ceased to struggle. The short man licked his cut lip. 

 'Interesting.' He hissed, leaning towards her. 'So valuable you are to me, mind you, I wouldn't give 
a sixpence. As well these appearances are deceptive. Ha! My darling! And what if Emhyr gave you as 
a gift to not Vilgefortz or Rience nor that gallant fellow in the feathered helmet, but to old Terranova? 
Would Emhyr be so kind to old Terranova? What do you say to that, prophetess? Since you are able to 
prophesy!' 

 His breath smelled unbearable. Ciri turned her head, wincing. He got it wrong. 

 'Do not give me the beak sparrow! I do not shrink from birds. Or maybe I should? What, false seer? 
Did I guess wrong? Should I be afraid of birds?' 

 'You should,' whispered Ciri, feeling dizzy in the head and chill that was suddenly rising. 

 Terranova laughed while throwing back his head. The laughter became a cry of pain. A great gray 
owl flew down quietly and dug her claws into his eyes. The sorcerer let go of Ciri, and with a rapid 
motion knocked the owl itself, and soon fell to his knees clutching his face. From between his fingers 
flowed blood. Ciri screamed and fell back. Terranova withdrew his bloodstained hands from his face 
which was covered with mucus, he began chanting a spell with a wild piercing cry. He did not have 
time. Behind him materialized an indistinct shape, a witcher's sword howled through the air and 
pierced his neck just below the occiput. 

 

*** 

 

 'Geralt!' 

 'Ciri.' 

 'No time for sentimentality,' said the owl from atop a wall, transforming into a dark haired woman. 
'Run! Squirrels are coming!' 

 Ciri freed herself from Geralt's arms, and looked in amazement. The female owl sitting on top of 
the wall looked terrible. She was charred, scratched, smeared with ashes and blood. 

 'You little monster,' said the owl, looking down from above. 'For your untimely prophesy I 
should... But I promised something to your witcher, and I always keep my word. I could not give you 
Rience, Geralt. In return I give you her. Farewell. Flee!' 

 


*** 

 

 Cahir Mawr Dyffryn aep Ceallach was angry. He had only been able to see for one second the girl 
he had been ordered to catch, but before he had time to take any action, those sorcerers had 
transformed Garstang into an inferno that prevented any action. Cahir lost his direction in the smoke 
and fire, blindly running down halls, stairs and galleries, cursing Vilgefortz to Rience, himself and the 
world. 

 From an elf he learned that the girl had been seen outside the palace, on her way to escaping to 
Aretuza. And then luck smiled on Cahir. The Scoia'tael found a horse saddled in the sable. 

 

*** 

 

 'Run ahead, Ciri. They are close. I will stop them, and you run. Run with all your might! Like in the 
slaughterhouse!' 

 'Do you want to leave me alone?' 

 'I'll go after you, But do not look back!' 

 'Give me my sword, Geralt.' 

 He looked at her, Ciri felt self conscious. She had never seen eyes like those. 

 'With a sword, you may have to kill. Can you?' 

 'I don't know. Give me the sword.' 

 'Run. And don't look back' 

 

*** 

 

 Horse's hooves rang on the road. Ciri looked back. And she was paralysed with fear. 

 The knight in pursuit wore black armour with a helmet adorned with wings of a bird of prey. The 
wings rustled, waving wildly. Horseshoes created sparks on the cobblestones of the road. 

 Ciri was unable to move. 

 The black horse broke through the roadside bushes, the knight gave a loud cry. In that cry was 
Cintra, a night of murder, blood and fire. Ciri overcame her overwhelming fear and rushed to escape. 
With momentum she jumped over a fence, falling into a small courtyard with a pond and fountain. 
There was no way out of the yard, all about rose high smooth walls. The horse snorted almost behind 
her. Ciri fell back, stumbled and shuddered at finding her back against a hard, unmoveable wall. She 
was trapped. 

 A bird of prey flapped its wings and flew away. The black knight made his horse rear, jumped the 
fence separating him from the courtyard. The hooves echoed on the flagstones, the horse slipped and 
dove, sitting on its haunches. The knight reeled in the saddle, tipped. The horse rose and the knight 
feel, causing a crash as his armour hit the stones. He, however, rose immediately and moved quickly 
towards Ciri, who was squeezed into a corner. 

 'Don't touch me!' She shouted, drawing her sword. 'I will never let you touch me again!' 

 The knight approached slowly, looming above her like a huge black tower. 

 The wings on his helmet shook and rustled. 

 'You will not escape me now, young lion of Cintra.' Through the visor of the helmet his eyes 
burned mercilessly. 'Not this time. This time you have no escape, my wild lady.' 

 'Do not touch me,' she repeated, her voice choked with horror, her back pressed against the stone 
wall. 

 'I have to. I'm following orders.' 

 When he reached out, fear suddenly disappeared; in its place was a wild rage. Tense muscles that 
had been paralysed with fear, sprang into action, all the moves she had learned in Kaer Morhen 
performed by themselves, smoothly and seamlessly. Ciri jumped, the knight rushed at her, but was not 
prepared for a pirouette, that without effort, took her out of reach of his hands. Her sword howled and 
bit, hitting safely on his plate armour. The knight staggered and fell to one knee, from under his 
pauldron a trickle of bright red blood appeared. Screaming with rage, Ciri circled him again with a 


pirouette, she struck again, this time directly to the top of his helmet, the knight fell on his other knee. 
Rage and fury blinded her completely; she could see nothing but hateful wings. A shower of black 
feathers, a wing fell off, the other hung on the bloody pauldron. The knight, still vainly trying to rise 
from his knees, tried to stop the sword with his armoured glove, he groaned painfully, when the 
witcher's blade cut the mesh and hand. For her next blow to the helmet, Ciri jumped to gain 
momentum for the last murderous blow. 

 She did not strike. 

 There was no black helmet, no wings of a bird of prey, whose sound had pursued her in her 
nightmares. He was no longer the Black Knight of Cintra. Instead there was a pale dark-haired young 
man writhing in a pool of blood, a young man with blue eyes and his mouth twisted into a grimace of 
terror. The Black Knight of Cintra had fallen under the blows of her sword, had ceased to exist, the 
wings that caused her to be afraid were no more than limp feathers. The frightened boy, bent over, 
vomiting blood, was nothing. She did not know him, had never seen him before. She did not care. She 
as not afraid of him, did not hate him. She did not want to kill him. 

 She threw her sword on the ground. 

 She turned around, hearing the screams from the Scoia'tael running from Garstang. She realised 
that in a moment they would surround the courtyard. She realised that they would catch her on the 
road. She had to be faster than them. She ran to the black horse, who was stamping its hooves on the 
flagstones and galloped off with a cry, leaping into the saddle as she ran. 

 

*** 

 

 'Leave me alone...' Cahir Mawr Dyffryn aep Ceallach groaned to the elves trying to lift him, 
pushing himself up with his good hand. 'I'm all right! It's a small wound... after her. After the girl...' 

 One of the elves cried, splattering blood across Cahir's face. Another Scoia'tael staggered and fell 
to his knees, holding both of his hands to his belly, were it had been torn open. The others fell back, 
dispersing across the courtyard with swords drawn. 

 A white-haired monster attacked them. He jumped from the wall. From a height it was impossible 
to jump without breaking a leg. It was impossible to land softly, turning a pirouette that blurred to the 
eye and killing a split second later. But the white-haired monster did it. And he began to kill. 

 The Scoia'tael fought fiercely. They had the advantage. But they had no chance. Cahir gaped in 
horror at the sight of the massacre that was carried out. The gray-haired girl who had struck him a 
moment ago was fast, was incredible agile as a cat who was protecting her kittens. But the white-
haired monster who jumped upon the Scoia'tael was like a Zerrikanian tiger. The gray-haired girl 
from Cintra, who, for unknown reason, had not killed him, had seemed to be crazy. The white-haired 
monster was not crazy. He was calm and cold. And calmly and coldly killed. 

 The Scoia'tael had no chance. Their bodies collapsed on after another on the flagstones of the 
courtyard. But none yielded. Even when there were only two, they did not flee, again they attacked the 
monster with white hair. Before Cahir's eyes, the monster cut one of their arms above the elbow, the 
next blow that was dealt was seemingly weak and awkward, however, it threw the elf back, threw him 
back into the pond of water. Water spilled over the edge of the pond in crimson waves. 

 The severed arm elf cursed in the fountain, staring, watching his blood gush from the stump. The 
white-haired monster grabbed him by the hair and with a quick slash of his sword, but his throat. 

 When Cahir opened his eyes, the monster was right before him. 

 'Don't kill me...' he whispered, abandoning his attempts to rise on the floor slippery with blood. 
The hand that had been wounded by the gray-haired girl had stopped hurting and was numb. 

 'I know who you are, Nilfgaardian.' The monster with the white hair kicked the helmet with the 
broken wing. You've stubbornly pursued her for a long time. But you couldn't even hurt her.' 

 'Don't kill me.' 

 'Give me a reason. Just one. Quickly.' 

 'I..' whispered Cahir 'I was the one who took her from Cintra. The fire... I saved her. I saved her 
life...' 


 When he opened his eyes the monster was gone, he was alone in the yard, alone with the bodies of 
the elves. The tinkling water from the fountain, poured over the edge of the pond, washing the blood 
from the floor. 

 Cahir fainted. 

 

*** 

 

 At the foot of the tower was a building that was one large room or rather a kind of colonnade. The 
roof of the colonnade, probably illusionary, was full of holes. It was supported on carved columns and 
pilasters in the form of scantily clad caryatids of stunning beasts. They same caryatids maintained an 
arch portal, where Ciri had disappeared. Behind the portal, Geralt distinguished stairs leading 
upwards. To the tower. 

 He cursed under his breath. He did not understand why Ciri had run towards it. Trailing behind her 
on the top of walls he had seen the horse fall. He had seen her nimbly rise, but instead of running 
forward along the path that wrapped around like a serpent to the summit, she ran down the mountain, 
towards the lonely tower. The elves did not see him or Ciri, as they were too busy with their bows 
trying to shoot humans who ran to the foot of the mountain. Reinforcements had come from Aretuza. 
He intended to follow Ciri down the stairs when he heard a murmur. From above. He turned quickly. 
It was not a bird. 

 Vilgefortz, shaking his wide sleeves, flew through a hole in the roof and dropped slowly to the 
ground. 

 Geralt stood before the entrance to the tower, drew his sword and sighed. He had sincerely hoped 
that the dramatic final battle would be fought between Vilgefortz and Philippa Eilhart. He had not the 
slightest desire to participate in such dramas. 

 Vilgefortz brushed off his doublet, settling the sleeves, glanced at the witcher and read his thoughts. 

 'Fucking drama.' he sighed. 

 Geralt made no comment. 

 'She went into the tower?' 

 He did not answer. The sorcerer nodded. 

 'So here we have the epilogue,' he said coldly. 'It's crowning work. Or is it destiny? You know 
where the stairs lead? To Tor Lara. To the Tower of Gulls. From there, there is no exit. Everything is 
over.' 

 Geralt stepped back so that the caryatids that formed the portal protected his flank. 

 'Of course.' He drawled, watching the hands of the sorcerer. 'Everything is over. Half of your 
accomplices are dead. The corpses of elves who were brought to Thanedd are lying one after the other 
all the way to Garstang. The rest have fled. From Aretuza reinforcements of sorcerers have arrived 
and Dijkstra's men. The Nilfgaardian that was to take Ciri, has probably already bled to death. And 
Ciri is there in the tower. And from there, there is not exit? I glad to hear that. It means that there is 
only one entrance. And I'm guarding it.' 

 Vilgefortz was angry. 

 'You are wrong. You can still not properly assess the situation. The Chapter and the Council ceased 
to exist. The army of Emperor Emhyr is marching north: deprived of advice, magic and assistance the 
kings are helpless as children. Under pressure from Nilfgaard, their kingdoms will topple like sand 
castles. I suggested it to you yesterday , and today I say: join the winners. We will spit on the losers.' 

 'You're the loser. You Emhyr you are just an instrument. He needed Ciri, so he sent here the guy 
with the helmet with wings. It will be interesting to see what Emhyr does when you communicate the 
failure of your mission.' 

 'You shoot at random, witcher. Of course, you did not hit. What if I told you that Emhyr is my 
tool?' 

 'I don't believe it/' 

 'Geralt lets be reasonable. Do you really want to waste time with this theatre, is the final battle so 
trivial between Good and Evil? I renew the proposal from yesterday. It is not too late. You can still 
choose, you can come to the appropriate side...' 


 'On the side, which today I thinned slightly?' 

 'Do not smile, your demonic smiles do not impress me. A few elves made into mincemeat? Artaud 
Terranova? Small things, insignificant details. We can pass over them on the agenda.' 

 'But of Course! I know your world view. Death does not count right? Especially someone else's?' 

 'Do not be banal. I feel sorry for Artaud, but in the end what are you going to do. Call it... a 
reckoning. Lately I have tried to kill you myself twice. Emhyr was impatient, so I ordered some 
murders against you. Every time I did it with real reluctance. I, you see, I still have hope that one day 
we will be in that painting together.' 

 'Throw away that hope, Vilgefortz.' 

 'Sheath your sword. Let us enter Tor Lara together. Be reassured that the child of the Elder Blood is 
up there somewhere, probably dying from fear. And we will leave here together. You'll be with her. 
You can watch as she fulfils her destiny. And Emperor Emhyr? Emperor Emhyr will get what he 
wanted. Because I forget to tell you that although Codringher and Fenn are dead, their work and ideas 
are still alive.' 

 'You're lying. Get away from here. Before I spit on you.' 

 'Really, I have no desire to kill you. I hate killing.' 

 'Really? What about Lydia van Bredevoort?' 

 The sorcerer pursed his lips. 

 'Do not say that name, witcher.' 

 Geralt tighten his grip on the hilt of his sword and smiled mockingly. 

 'Why did Lydia have to die, Vilgefortz? Why did you command her to die? She had to divert 
attention from you, right? You had to give yourself time to become resistant to demeterium , to send a 
telepathic signal to Rience? Poor Lydia, she of the wronged face. Everyone knew that she was a 
person of no importance. Everyone. Even her.' 

 'Shut up.' 

 'You had Lydia murdered, sorcerer. You used her. And now you want to use Ciri? With my help? 
No. Do not enter Tor Lara.' 

 The Sorcerer took a step back. Geralt tensed, ready to pounce and deliver a blow. But Vilgefortz did 
not raise his hand, he stretched it a little to one side. Suddenly, in his hand, materialized a thick staff, 
about six feet long. 

 'I know,' he said. 'what bothers you in a reasonable assessment of a situation. I know it is 
complicated and difficult to predict the future, your right. This is your arrogance, Geralt. I'll undo 
your arrogance. I'll undo it with this wand here.' 

 The witcher narrowed his eyes, lifting his blade slightly. 

 'I tremble with anticipation.' 

 Some weeks later, cured thanks to the efforts of the Dryads and the water of Brokilon forest, Geralt 
reflected on the mistakes made during the fight. He came to the conclusion that he had not made any. 
The only error he committed was before the fight. He should have fled before the fighting began. 

 The Sorcerer was fast, the wand in his hand flashed like lightning. Greater was the astonishment of 
Geralt, when the wand rang against his sword. But there was no time to wonder. Vilgefortz attacked, 
the witcher had to dodge and squirm in evasion. He was afraid of parrying with his sword. The wand 
was made of iron and magic. 

 Four times he found himself in a position to counter attack and strike. Four times he struck a blow. 
In the head, neck, arm and in the thigh. Each of the blows would be fatal. But each was parried. 

 No man would be able to parry those blows. Geralt started to understand little by little. But it was 
too late. 

 He saw the blow that the sorcerer struck him. The impact threw him against the wall. He pushed 
with his back, failed to make a jump, to make a feint, the stroke had deprived him of breath. He 
received a second hit in the shoulder, flew back again, hitting his head against the pillar, against the 
chest of a caryatid. Vilgefortz turned away in a deft leap, he waved his stick and punched him in the 
stomach, below the ribs. Hard. Geralt doubled over and was struck on the side of the head. His knees 
weakened below him suddenly and he fell. And that was the end of the fight. In essence. 


 Clumsily he tried to shield himself with his sword. The blade pierced the wall and the pilaster, he 
erupted in a groan vibrant and clear . He protected his head with his right hand, the staff fell and broke 
his forearm. The pain blinded him completely. 

 'I could ruin your brain through your ears.' Vilgefortz said from far away. 'But this is a lesson. You 
made a mistake, witcher. You have confused the surface of a pond as the sky with stars at night. Oh, 
did you vomit? Good. Brain injury. Do you bleed from the nose? Great. So, I'll see you. Someday. 
Maybe.' 

 He saw nothing and heard nothing. Sinking, sinking into something warm. He thought that 
Vilgefortz had gone. He was surprised, then, when his leg felt the vengeance of the iron wand, 
shattering his femur. 

 Any following blows, even if they occurred, he could not remember. 

 

*** 

 

 'Hold on, Geralt, do not give up.' Triss Merigold repeated endlessly. 'Hold on. Do not die. Please 
do not die...' 

 'Ciri...' 

 'Do not speak. We have to get you out of here. Hang on... By the gods, I have no strength...' 

 'Yennefer... I have...' 

 'You do not have to do anything! You cannot do anything! Hold on, don't let go... Do not faint... 
Do not die, please...' 

 She dragged him across a floor strewn with corpses. Geralt saw his chest and stomach bathed in 
blood that flowed from his nose. He saw his leg, It was twisted at an odd angle and appeared much 
shorter than his healthy one. He did not feel pain. He felt cold, his whole body was cold. He wanted to 
puke. 

 'Hold on, Geralt. Aid comes from Aretuza. It is coming soon...' 

 'Dijkstra. If Dijkstra gets me... if... it's all over...' 

 Triss cursed. Frantically. 

 She dragged him down some stairs. His broken leg and arm bounced on the steps. The pain was 
revived, it bit into his bowels, into his temples, flashed in his eyes, ears, to the top of his head. But he 
did not scream. He knew that a shout would relieve him, but did not shout. He just opened his mouth, 
which also brought relief. 

 He heard an explosion. 

 At the top of the stairs stood Tissaia de Vries. Her hair was in disarray, her face covered with dust. 
She raised both hands, her fingers burned. She shouted an incantation, and the fire dancing on her 
fingers burst forth in a fireball which roared down the stairs, the flames crackling and blinding. The 
witcher heard the rumble from below, the walls crumbling, the shill screams of the burnt. 

 'Tissaia, no!' Triss yelled desperately. 'Don't do it!' 

 'Do not enter here,' said the great teacher without looking back. 'This Garstang on the island of 
Thanedd. Nobody invited the royal servants carrying out the orders of their short-sighted rulers!' 

 'You're killing them!' 

 'Be silent, Triss Merigold! The coup against the unity of the Brother hood was not successful, this 
island is governed by the Chapter! So keep the Kings away from the affairs of the Chapter! It is our 
conflict and we'll solve it ourselves! We will resolve our issues and then put an end to this idiotic war! 
Because we, the sorcerers, we are responsible for the fate of the world!' 

 Other fireballs shot forth from her hands, the echo of explosions was repeatedly heard between the 
columns and walls. 

 'Get out!' She screamed again. 'Do not enter here! Get out!' 

 The screams from the bottom subsided. Geralt understood that the besiegers withdrew from the 
staircase. Tissaia's silhouette blurred before his eyes. It was not magic. He had lost consciousness. 

 'Get out of here, Triss Merigold.' The sorceress's voice sounded like it was coming from a 
distance, as if from behind a wall. 'Philippa Eilhart has already fled, flying away on owl wings. You 
were an accomplice in this conspiracy, I should punish you. But enough of blood, death and disgrace! 


Go away! Go to Aretuza, with your allies! Teleport. The portal in the Tower of Gulls no longer exists. 
It collapsed together with the tower. You can teleport without fear. To where ever you want. Even to 
your King Foltest for who you have betrayed the Brotherhood!' 

 'I will not leave Geralt...' Triss moaned. 'He can not fall into the hands of Redania... He is seriously 
wounded... Bleeding internally... And I no longer have the strength! I do not have the strength to open 
a portal! Tissaia! Help me, please!' 

 Darkness. Biting cold. From a distance, from behind the stone wall, the voice of Tissaia de Vries. 

 'I'll help you.' 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


Evertsen, Peter, n. 1234, confiendent of Emperor Emhyr Deithwen and one of the true creators behind 
the power of the Empire. A Constable in the army in the times of the Northern War (see) since 1290, 
High treasurer of the crown. At the end of the reign of Emhry, he was elevated to the dignity of the 
Empire. During the reign of Emperor Morvran Voorhis, he was falsely accussed of embezzlement and 
convicted and imprisoned, f 1301 in Castle Winneburg. Posthumously, he was cleared by the Emperor 
Jan Calveit in the year 1328. 

 

Effenberg & Talbot, 

Encyclopaedia Maxima Mundi, Volume V 

 

 

Tremble, at the destroyer of nations. Who will trample your land and divide it with the noose. Your 
cities will be destroyed and their inhabitants deprived. The bat, the owl and the story will inhabit your 
homes, make them into the serpents nest. 

Aen Ithlnnespeath 

 

