Chapter Twelve 
 
 
It was the sixth day after the new moon of June when they reach Rivia. 
The emerged from the woods and appeared on the side of a hill. At the foot of the hill, 
suddenly, without warning, flashed the mirror surface of the lake of Loc Eskalott, which the 
valley took its name from. In its waters were reflected the shapes of mahakam massif, fir 
trees, and the larch-covered hills of Craag Ros. At the lake's peninsula was Castle Rivia, the 
winter residence of the kings of Lyria and at the southern tip of Loc Eskalott was situated the 
city. 
'So here we are,' Dandelion confirm the obvious fact. 'Destiny has brought us here again, 
the circle has closed. I don't see the blue and white banner on the castle towers, so Queen 
Meve must not be present. I don't think that she has forgiven your desertion...' 
'Believe me, Dandelion,' Geralt interrupted him, guiding his horse down the slope. 'I do 
not care if she has forgiven me or wont forgive me...' 
Next to the city, near the entrance gate, stood a colourful tent reminiscent of a cake. In 
front of the tent, on a pole, hung a white shield with a red chevron. Under the raised part of 
the tent stood a king in full armour and a white tabard the same as the shield. The knight, 
with a penetrating and challenging look, stared at the women passing by before him with 
sacks of coal, charcoal, deadwood and barrels of pitch. Upon seeing Geralt and Dandelion 
approach on horseback, his eyes lit up with hope. 
'The Lady of your heart,' Geralt thwarted the hopes of the knight with a chilling voice, 
'whoever she is, is the most beautiful and virtuous of all women from the Yaruga to the 
Buina.' 
'On my honour,' the knight reluctantly answered. 'You speak the truth, sir.' 
 
*** 
 
A blond girl in a silver studded, leather jacket vomited in the middle of the street, bent in 
half, holding the stirrup of a grey mare. Two colleagues of the girl, in identical clothing, with 
swords on their backs and headbands holding back their hair, vulgarly insulted passerbys with 
their slurred speech. both were more than drunk, weaving on their feet and clutching to the 
sides of horses tied to a pole set in front of the inn. 
'Do we really need to go in there?' asked Dandelion. 'Inside there is bound to be more like 
them.' 
'The meeting is arranged here, remember? This is the Cock and Bull inn, which was 
written on the tablet.' 
The blond girl again leaned forward in her next spasm of vomiting. The mare snorted and 
shied, so the girl fell to the ground landing in her own vomit. 
'What are you staring at, asshole?' yelled one of the colleagues. 'White hair!' 
'Geralt,' whispered Dandelion. 'Please don't do anything stupid.' 
'Don't worry.' 
They tied their horses to the berth at the front of the inn. The young men were ignoring 
them, busy shouting at a townswoman passing down the road with a child. They did not like 
what they saw. 
The first thing that drew the eye when they entered the inn was the inscription - CHEF 
WANTED. The second was the large painting on the wall showing a bearded monster with an 
axe dripping blood. The sign underneath it read - Mahakam Dwarf - vile traitor. 

Dandelion lacked no reason to be scared. The only customers in the establishment, apart 
from some winos who drank with dignity and a couple of prostitutes, were people wearing 
leather garments and with swords hanging from their backs. 
There were eight of them in total, of both sexes, but they made enough fuss to be 
eighteen. They constantly shouted insults and blasphemes. 
'I recognise you, gentlemen. I know who you are,' said the innkeeper. 'I have a message 
for you. You have to go to the tavern called Wirsing's.' 
'That's good tavern,' Dandelion rejoiced. 
'Well then, go and take advantage of their establishment,' the innkeeper said, drying 
glasses with his apron. 'If you don't like my place, take your business elsewhere. But I tell 
you that the Elms quarter only dwarves and non-humans inhabit there.' 
'So what?' Geralt blinked. 
'Well, you probably know this,' the innkeeper shrugged, 'but the one who left the message 
for you was a dwarf. If it pleases you t be dealing with such people... that is your business. 
You, gentlemen, know whose company you prefer.' 
'We are very picky when it comes to company,' said Dandelion, nodding his head towards 
the table with the men and women in leather jackets and headbands holding back their hair. 
'But it is not kind to point out something under someone's nose.' 
The innkeeper placed a freshly dried glass on the counter and looked at them scowling. 
'You have to be more understanding,' he said in an emphatic tone. 'The young people need 
to let off steam. It is well know that young people should let off steam. The war has 
mistreated them. Their fathers died...' 
'And their mothers are whoring,' finished Geralt, his voice as cold as an icy mountain 
stream. 'I understand. I embody tolerance. At least I try. Come on, Dandelion.' 
'Go ahead then, with all due respect,' said the innkeeper without any respect. 'Just don't 
complain that I didn't warn you. In these times it is easy to get fleeced in the dwarven quarter. 
Just...' 
'Just what?' 
'Just nothing. This is not my thing.' 
'Come on, Geralt,' said Dandelion to the witcher, he had started to notice the war orphans, 
those not completely drunk, eyes begin to glitter with the use of fisstech. 
'Goodbye, innkeeper. Who knows, maybe someday I'll visit your business. When you 
take down the sign in the entrance.' 
'And which one of the signs does not please you, gentlemen?' the innkeeper frowned and 
glared at them. 'Huh? The one with the dwarf?' 
'No, the one about the chef.' 
Three young people got up from the table, swaying on their feet, evidently with the 
intention of intercepting them. Two boys and a girl in black leather jackets. With swords on 
their backs. 
Geralt did not slow, he walked towards them, his face and eye were cold and completely 
indifferent. 
The young people at the very last moment, parted and retreated. Dandelion noticed the 
stench of beer. Sweat. And fear. 
'They have to get used to it,' the witcher said as they entered the street. 'They have to 
adapt.' 
'Sometimes it is difficult.' 
'This is not an argument, Dandelion.' 
The air was hot, stick and as thick as soup. 
 
*** 

 
Outside, in front of the inn, two young men in black jackets helped the blond girl wash in 
the horse trough. The girl, spat, snorted and stammered trying to explain that she felt better 
and that she needed a drink. That they would definitely go the market stalls for entertainment, 
but not before a drink. 
Her name was Nadia Esposito. The name has been recorded in the annals. And went 
down in history. 
But Geralt and Dandelion did not know this yet. Nor did the girl. 
 
*** 
 
The streets of Rivia were alive with a great buzz and what appeared to be locals 
completely absorbed visiting traders. It seemed that everyone there traded everything, trying 
to change one thing for something else. From everywhere came the cacophony of sound of 
products being advertised, fierce haggling and from both sides the sounds of people being 
accused of fraud, theft, chicanery and other sins which had nothing to do with trade. 
Before coming to the Elms district, Geralt and Dandelion received many intrusting 
proposals. Offered to them was, among other things - a astrolabes, a tin trumpet and 
decorative cutlery adorned with the Frangipani family crest, shares in a copper mine, a jar of 
leeches. a tattered tome entitled The Miracle or Head of Medusa, a pair of breeding ferrets, an 
elixir to increase potency and even - for a negotiated price - a not too young, not too thin, and 
not very clean bride. 
A black-bearded dwarf with an unprecedented brazenness was trying to convince them to 
buy a cheap mirror in a frame, which he claim to be one of the magical Cambuscan mirrors. 
At that moment a stone was thrown which knocked the goods from his hand. 
'Mangy kobold!' cried the assailant, a dirty, barefoot urchin who was running away. 'Non-
human! Bearded Goat!' 
'I hope your gut rots, human worm!' roared the dwarf in return. 'I hope it will rot and 
come out your ass!' 
People watched in grim silence. 
 
*** 
 
The district of the Elms was located on the shore of the lake in a cove where grew alders, 
weeping willows and of course, elms. Here everything was much quieter and calm, nobody 
was buying anything and nobody wanted to sell. 
From the lake a breeze was blowing which was especially nice for the two after escaping 
the suffocating stench and flies of the market streets. 
They soon found the Wirising tavern. It was the first on the street and the saw it with 
ease. 
The porch was covered in climbing roses, and under the roof overgrown with moss, 
where a swallows nests hung, were two dwarves. 
'Geralt and Dandelion,' said one of the dwarves belching loudly. 'You, rogues have come 
as expected.' 
Geralt dismounted. 
'Hail, Yarpen Zigrin. Good to see you, Zoltan Chivay.' 
 
*** 
 

They were the only guests in the pub that smelled of garlic, spices and something 
indescribable, but pleasant. They sat at a heavy table overlooking the lake, which through the 
glass window next to the table, appeared mysterious, magical and romantic. 
'Where is Ciri?' Yarpen Zigrin asked bluntly. 'I hope nothing...' 
'No,' Geralt quickly interrupted him, 'she is on her way. You will see her soon. Well, 
bearded storyteller, tell me what is new.' 
'What did I tell you?' Yarpen said sarcastically. 'What did I tell you, Zoltan? He returns 
from the end of the world, where he, if you believe the rumours, waded through blood, killed 
dragons and overthrew an empire. And he asks, how we are going. The same witcher.' 
'What smells so good?' Dandelion said, sniffing. 
'Lunch,' Yarpen Zigrin said. 'Meat. Don't ask us, Dandelion, where we came by the meat.' 
'No I'm not asking, because I know the joke.' 
'Don't be a bore.' 
'Where did the meat come from?' 
'He came alone to find us.' 
'And now, seriously,' Yarpen said, wiping his eyes, though the joke was, in fact, very old. 
'With regard to the food, we are in a critical situation, as always after a war. The meat is 
rarely seen, even poultry, fish is difficult to find as well... It is just as bad with flour, potatoes, 
and legumes... Farms were burned along with their stores, ponds were emptied, and the fields 
are fallow...' 
'Production has stagnated,' added Zoltan. 'There is no transport. The only thing that works 
is usury and barter. Have you seen the bazaar? The rich alongside the poor, selling and 
bartering the last remnants of his property and amassed fortunes...' 
'If we get a poor harvest before this winter then people will die of starvation.' 
'Is it really that bad?' 
'Coming from the south, you had to pass villages and settlements. Think of in how many 
you heard the barking of dogs.' 
'Bloody hell,' Dandelion slapped his forehead. 'I saw... I told you, Geralt, it was not 
normal! That something was missing! Ha! Now I realise! I did not hear any dogs! There was 
no...' 
He stopped suddenly, looked towards the kitchen where the smell of garlic and spices 
came from and terror came into his eyes. 
'Don't worry,' Yarpen grumbled. 'Our meat has never barked, meowed or cried for mercy. 
Our meat is nothing like that. It is fit for a king!' 
'Confess, dwarf!' 
'When we received your letter and it was clear that we would see you in Rivia, we were 
thinking, Zoltan and me, how we could entertain you. We were going round in circles until 
we felt like pissing. Then we approached the lake shore and saw that it was plagued by snails. 
Se we took a bag and filled it to the brim with those precious molluscs.' 
'We missed a few of them,' nodded Zoltan Chivay. 'But we were very drunk and they 
were very quick.' 
Both dwarves again burst out in laughter at the joke. 
'Wirsing,' Yarpen said pointing to the kitchen, 'can prepare snails well, as you must know 
that it requires a lot of science. The chef is well renown. Before becoming a widower, he and 
his woman owned an inn in Maribor, and he cooked so well that even the King himself was a 
guest there. And now let's drink, I say!' 
'But first,' Zoltan said, 'try some of the whitefish, freshly smoked and caught from the 
lake.' 
'And we are waiting for you story, gentlemen,' said Yarpen. 'We are curious to hear what 
you experienced.' 

 
*** 
 
The whitefish was still warm, oily and fragrant. The vodka was cold and her their teeth. 
Dandelion went first, with his flowery style, colourful language and embellishments on 
the story full of nonsense and lies. Then the witcher spoke. He told the pure truth, and spoke 
dry and monotonously. Dandelion could not stand it and interrupted again and again which 
earned him reprimands from the dwarves. 
And then the story was over and there was a long silence. 
'For the archer Milva!' Zoltan cleared his throat and raised his cup in a salute. 'For the 
Nilfgaardian. For Regis the herbalist, who entertained strangers in his hut, with moonshine 
made from mandrake. And for this Angouleme, with who I am not familiar. Let the earth rest 
light on them. Let them have there, in the afterlife, everything that they had scarce in this life. 
And let their names live on long in songs and stories. Let's drink.' 
'Let's drink,' echoed Dandelion and Yarpen. 
Let's drink, thought the witcher. 
 
*** 
 
Wirsing, a grey-haired man, pale and skin as a stick, a veritable denial of a stereotypical 
innkeeper and master of the culinary mysteries, deposited on the table a basket of white 
fragrant bread and a platter of snails, sizzling in garlic and spices on a bed of radish leaves. 
Dandelion, Geralt and the dwarves dug in quickly. The meal was exquisitely tasty and 
very funny at the same time, given the need for clumsy forceps and forks. 
They ate, smacking their lips, eating the bread and mincing words when referring to every 
second snail that slipped from the forceps. Two kittens also enjoyed the meal whenever a 
snail slipped from the clamps and rolled on the floor. 
The smell coming from the kitchen indicated that Wirsing was preparing another serving. 
 
*** 
 
Yarpen Zigrin reluctantly waved his hand, but realised the witcher was not going to give 
up. 
'For me there has been nothing new,' he said, spitting out a piece of snail shell. 'I was in 
the army... Then I was selected as a bailiff. I'll do a career in politics. There is too much 
competition in business. In politics any fool can hold the purse of a thief. It is easy to stand 
out.' 
 'Well, I,' said Zoltan Chivay, gesturing with a snail, 'am not for politics. I'll go home to 
my forge, driven by water and steam, accompanied by Figgis Merluzzo and Munro Bruys. 
You remember Figgis and Munro, witcher?' 
'Not just them.' 
'Yazon Varda was killed at the Yaruga,' Zoltan said dryly. 'Quite stupidly, in one of the 
last battles.' 
'A pity. And Percival Schettenbach?' 
'The gnome? Ah, he's fine. That rogue escaped the recruitment claiming his religion 
forbids war. And he succeeded, even though everyone knows that the entire pantheon of gods 
and goddesses would go to war for a pickled herring. He has a jewellery shop in Novigrad. 
He bought my parrot, Field Marshal Duda, and made the bird a living advertisement. He 
taught him to say "Diamonds! Diamonds!' And it works, go figure. The gnome has clientele 
loaded with money. But it is Novigrad! And there is money in the streets. Therefore, we also 
want to establish a forge in Novigrad.' 
'Those people with scribble with shit on your door,' Yarpen said. 'Throw stones through 
your windows. They call you a damned dwarf. It doesn't matter that you are a veteran. In 
Novigrad you'll be nothing more than a pariah.' 
'I'll go anyway,' Zoltan said cheerfully. 'There is too much competition in Mahakam. And 
a lot of politicians. Let's drink for our friends. For Caleb Stratton. For Yazon Varda.' 
'For Regan Dahlberg,' Yarpen added, frowning. Geralt shook his head. 
'Regan also...' 
'Also. In Mayena. The old Dahlberg has been left alone in this world. Ah, hell, enough of 
this! Let's drink. and hurry up with those snail, because Wirsing is coming over with another 
pan.' 
 
*** 
 
The dwarves, with belts unbuckled, listened to Geralt's story of Dandelion's aristocratic 
romance, that ended on the gallows. The poet seemed offended and did not comment. Zoltan 
and Yarpen almost spilt apart with laughter. 
'Yes, yes,' Yarpen said finally, 'in the words of the old song - a man breaks down in tears 
and the woman smiles. pleased.' Some distinguish examples of that saying have joined with 
us around this table today. Look no further than Zoltan Chivay. With all the stories that have 
been told, he forgot to add that he is getting married. Soon, in September. The lucky woman 
is called Eudora Brekekes.' 
'Breckenriggs!' Zoltan emphatically corrected, frowning. 'I'm starting to get tired of 
correcting your pronunciation, Zigrin. Take heed, when I get tired of something I kick it up 
the ass!' 
'Where's the wedding? And when exactly?' Dandelion said soothingly. 'I ask because we 
will come. If you invite us, of course.' 
'We have not yet reached a decision on where, when or how, or if we are even getting 
married,' muttered Zoltan, visibly confused. 'Yarpen has rushed things. I think Eudora has 
committed, but who knows what will happen? It is still bad times.' 
'The second example of a girl's omnipotence,' continued Yarpen, 'is Geralt of Rivia, the 
witcher.' 
Geralt pretended to be busy with a snail. Yarpen snorted. 
'After miraculously finding his Ciri, he allows her to leave. He leaves her alone again, 
even though, as someone rightly pointed out here, it is still bad times. All of this happens to 
the witcher, because a woman wanted it. The witcher always does what this woman wants, a 
certain Yennefer of Vengerberg. If he at least got something from the sorceress in question... 
But he gets nothing. The truth. as King Dezmod used to say, looking at the chamber pot after 
relieving himself "The mind cannot comprehend this."' 
'I suggest,' said Geralt, picking up a cup with a wry smile, 'to drink and change to topic of 
conversation.' 
'Right,' Zoltan and Dandelion said in unison. 
 
*** 
 
Wirsing carried a third and forth platter of snails to the table. Not forgetting, of course, 
the bread and vodka. The diners were beginning to get full, so it was not surprising that the 
toast were becoming more frequent. Nor was there any wonder that they spoke more 
philosophy and with increasingly thick speech. 

'The evil we were fighting against,' insisted the witcher, 'is a manifestation of the action of 
chaos and their performances aimed to disturb the order. So, when evil spread, the order 
could not reign, and all that order was building fell apart, and nothing was left standing. The 
faint glow of wisdom and the timid flame of hope, embers that still retained the heat, rather 
than flash and then die away. Darkness ensued. And the darkness was filled with fangs, claws 
and blood.' 
Yarpen Zigrin stroked his beard, smearing grease from the snails through it. 
'You speak well, witcher,' he admitted. 'But, as young Cerro said to King Vridnak on their 
first date "Does it have any practical uses?"' 
'There is no ground for the existence of witchers,' Geralt did not smile, 'because the 
struggle of Good and Evil takes place now in an entirely different field of battle in a 
completely different way. The evil is no longer chaotic. It is no longer a blind force, 
unbridled, which a witcher has to face, a mutant as deadly as chaotic evil itself. Today Evil is 
governed by laws - because the laws serve them. They act in accordance with treaties and 
have signed for peace, because some treaties allow...' 
'Settlers to be forcefully expelled,' Zoltan guessed. 
'And not only that,' Dandelion added gravely. 'Not only that.' 
'So what?' Yarpen Zigrin, sat back and folded his hands on his belly. 'We've all seen 
something. Everyone has been pissed on. Each lost a dream. That's what happens, it's always 
been like that and it always will be. We are the lowest, nothing more than these empty shells. 
What do you dislike, witcher? What is going on? The changes that the world is experiencing? 
The development? The progress?' 
'Maybe.' 
Yarpen was silent for a while, watching the witcher from under his bushy eyebrows. 
'Progress,' he said at last, 'is like a herd of pigs. So that is the way you see progress, and 
that is how you judge it. Like a herd of pigs that walk through the courtyard of the farmhouse. 
The existence of the herd means profit. The pork knuckles. The sausages, the bacon. In short, 
there are a number of advantages! So you shouldn't pout and complain that there is shit 
everywhere.' 
Everyone was quiet for a time, weighing his heart and conscience on all matters and 
important issues. 
'I need a drink,' Dandelion finally said. 
No one protested. 
 
*** 
 
'Progress,' Yarpen Zigrin said into the silence, 'will, in the long run, brighten the darkness. 
the darkness will give way to the light. But not immediately. And, of course, not without a 
struggle.' 
Geralt, staring out the window, smiled at his own thoughts and dreams. 
'That darkness you speak of,' he said, 'is a state of spirit, not matter. To fight something 
you need to train something quite different than a witcher. It is time to start.' 
'You will start to retrain? Is that what you were thinking?' 
'Not at all. this job holds no interest to me. I will go into retirement.' 
'Is that right!' 
'I'm serious. no more being a witcher.' 
There was a long silence, broken occasionally by the furious meows of the kittens as they 
scratched at each other in a game. 
'No more being a witcher,' Yarpen Zigrin repeated. 'Ha! I don't know what to think about 
that, as old King Dezmod said when caught cheating at cards. But i have a very bad feeling. 

Dandelion, you have travelled with him and spent a lot of time at his side. Has he shown 
other symptoms of paranoia?' 
'Okay, okay,' said Geralt with a stony face. 'No more jokes, as King Dezmod said when 
all of his guests at a feast began to go livid and croak. I have said all that I had to say. And 
now down to actions.' 
He picked up his sword, which was hanging on the back of his chair. 
'Here is your Sihil, Zoltan Chivay. I return it to you with gratitude and recognition. It has 
been useful. It has helped me. It has saved lives. And taken lives.' 
'Witcher...' the dwarf raised his hands in a defensive gesture. 'The sword is yours. I did 
not lend it to you, I gave it to you. As a gift...' 
'Hush, Chivay. I give you back your sword. I'll no longer need it.' 
'Quickly,' Yarpen said. 'Pour vodka into him, Dandelion, because he is talking like an old 
Schrader when he fell into the mine shaft on his head. Geralt, I know you've a deep 
temperament and a sensitive soul, but do not talk such crap, as you can see, Yennefer is not 
here, just us old wolves. Don't tell us old wolves stories of a witcher not needing a sword, the 
world is not like that. You are a witcher and you will need...' 
'No, I won't,' Geralt gently denied. 'Perhaps this will surprise you old wolves, but I have 
come to the conclusion that it is foolish to piss in the wind. That it is foolish to stick my neck 
out for anyone. Even if that someone pays. An no, this is not an existential philosophy. 
Believe it, but suddenly, I have taken a tremendous affection for my own skin. I have come to 
the conclusion that it would be stupid to risk it in defence of others..' 
'I noticed,' Dandelion nodded. 'On one hand, it is smart. On the other...' 
'There is no other.' 
'Yennefer and Ciri,' Yarpen asked after a little while, 'have something to do with your 
decision?' 
'Much.' 
'Then everything is clear,' Zoltan sighed. 'I have no clue how a master swordsman will 
adapt to normal life. But, try as I might, I cannot see you planting cabbages, although I do 
have respect for your choice... Innkeeper! This sword is a Mahakam Rune Sihil from the 
Rhundurina forge itself. It was a gift. If the recipient does not want it, then the one who gave 
it must take it back. Take it and hang it over your fireplace. Rename you inn to, "The 
Witcher's Sword". Then on winter nights we can tell stories about monsters and treasure, of 
bloody wars and bitter battles. Of death. Of deep love and unwavering friendship. About 
courage and honour and this sword will hang there, above the listeners and inspire the 
storyteller. Now pour me a drink, gentlemen, a glass of vodka, because I will continue and 
will be delivering profound truths and philosophies, including existential ones.' 
they pour vodka into their glasses quietly and with dignity. They looked each other in the 
eye and drank. With no less dignity. Yarpen Zigrin cleared his throat, looked at his audience 
to make sure they were sufficiently focused and dignified. 
'Progress,' he spoke with deliberation, 'will brighten the darkness, because that is what 
progress does, like, excuse the expression, an ass is for shitting. Each time there will be more 
light, and we will be less afraid of the dark and the evil that lurks in it. Perhaps the day will 
come, when we will simply stop believing that something is hidden in the darkness. and we 
will laugh at that kind of fear. It will seem childish. And will bring shame! But there will 
always, always be darkness. And evil will always be waiting in the darkness, with its claws, 
fangs and blood. And witchers will always be necessary.' 
 
*** 
 

They sat in meditation an silence, deep in thought, so deep that they did not noticed the 
increasing noise in the city - a sinister and menacing noise like the irritated buzzing of wasps. 
They barely noticed how quiet and empty lakeside boulevard was until one person ran 
past, then another, then another. 
Suddenly, shouting broke out in the city and the door of Wirsing's inn burst wide open 
and a young dwarf ran into the room. He was red with effort and had difficulty catching his 
breath. 
'What is it?' Yarpen Zigrin lifted his head. 
The dwarf, still breathless, pointed in the direction of the town. His eyes were wild. 
'Take a deep breath,' Zoltan Chivay advised. 'And tell us what's wrong.' 
 
*** 
 
Later it was claimed that the tragic events in Rivia were an unfortunate coincidence that 
was a spontaneous reaction, a sudden and unpredictable outburst of justified anger induced by 
the hostility of the dwarves and elves towards the humans of the city. It was argued that is 
was not the humans, but the dwarves that attacked first, that they provoked the violence. A 
dwarfish heckler insulted the noble Lady Nadia Esposito, a war orphan and that he used 
violence against her. Later when the nobles came to the defence of their friend, the dwarf 
called upon his relatives. A fight ensued, which soon became a real battle that , in the 
twinkling of an eye, engulfed the whole bazaar. 
The battle degraded into a bloodbath, in a massive attack from the humans against the 
districts occupied by the non-humans and the district of the Elms. In less than an hour, since 
the incident at the bazaar to the intervention of the sorceresses, one hundred and seventy 
people were killed, about half of which were women and children. 
This version of events is reflected in the works of Professor Emmerich Gottschalk of 
Oxenfurt. 
But there are others who argue otherwise. How can this be spontaneous, this 
unpredictable explosion, that within minutes of there were carts on the streets of the bazaar 
handing out weapons among the humans? Where did the sudden righteous anger of this mob 
come from, of who the most visible and active members at the time of the massacre, were 
people whom nobody new, and who had only come to Rivia a few day s before the incident, 
and they disappeared without a trace? why did the military intervene so late? And why with 
such distaste? 
Some scholars sought to interpret events in Rivia as a Nilfgaardian provocation, and there 
were others who argued that everything had been hatched by dwarves in league with the 
elves. Who were killing their own to discredit the humans. 
Lost among the majority of scientific voices was a theory by a young, bold and eccentric 
lawyer, who - until he was silenced - claimed that the incident in Rivia was not from secret 
conspiracies, but ordinary and very common characteristics of the local population - 
ignorance, xenophobia, violence and profound brutalisation. 
Later, everyone grew board and stopped talking about the matter altogether. 
 
 *** 
 
'Into the cellar,' the witcher said grimly, listening to the approaching noise and the roar of 
the crowd. 'Get into the basement, dwarves! And without your stupid heroism!' 
'Witcher,' Zoltan protested, clutching the handle of his axe. 'I cannot... They are killing 
my brothers...' 

 'Into the cellar. Think about Eudora. Do you want her to be a widow before the 
wedding?' 
The argument worked. The dwarves ran to the cellar. Geralt and Dandelion hid the 
entrance with a rug. Wirsing, usually pale, was as white as buttermilk. 
'I saw a pogrom in Maribor,' he stammered, looking at the entrance of the cellar. 'If they 
find them there...' 
'Go to the kitchen.' 
Dandelion was also pale. Geralt was not surprised. Until recently it was a formless and 
monotonous roar but now they could pick out individual voices. The sound of them lifted the 
hair on his head. 
'Geralt,' moaned the poet. 'I have a certain resemblance to an elf...' 
'Don't be stupid.' 
Clouds of smoke appeared over the rooftops. A group of dwarves came running through 
the alleys. Dwarves of both sexes. 
Two of them, without hesitation, jumped into the lake and started swimming, splashing 
hard and moving for the center of the lake. The rest scattered. Some turned towards the inn. 
The mob poured into the street. They were faster than the dwarves. In their race was the 
lust for killing. 
The cries of the victims drilled their ears, ringing on the stained glass windows of the 
premises. Geralt noticed that his hands had begun to tremble. 
One of the dwarves was literally torn to pieces. Another was thrown to the ground and in 
seconds became a shapeless, bloody mass. A woman was massacred with pitchforks and 
spears. The child she was protecting was simply trampled, crushed to death beneath their feet. 
Three dwarves - a man and two women - ran towards the inn. The roaring crowd raced 
after them. 
Geralt took a deep breath. He stood up. Feeling the terrified eyes of Dandelion and 
Wirsing, he removed from the shelf above the fireplace, Sihil, the Mahakam sword forged in 
the foundry of Rhundurina itself. 
'Geralt...' Dandelion moaned in a heartbreaking tone. 
'Very well,' said the witcher, walking towards the exit. 'But this is the last time! Damn 
me, but it really is the last time!' 
He went out onto the porch, then jumped off it and cut a hulking man in a masonry 
smock, then a woman that threatened him with a shovel. He then amputated the hand of a 
woman who was grasping the hair of one of the dwarves. With two quick diagonal cuts he 
finished off the men kicking one of the fallen dwarves. 
He waded into the crowd. Quickly moving in semicircles. He slashed wide, seemingly at 
random - knowing that such swings were more spectacular than violent. He did not want to 
kill them. He just wanted to wounded them. 
'An elf! An elf!' someone in the mob shouted as if possessed. 'Kill the elf!' 
What nonsense, he thought, Dandelion might look like an elf, but I don't look like an elf in 
any way. 
He spotted the person who had shouted, maybe a soldier, for he was wearing uniform and 
high boots. He advanced through the crowd, dodging like an eel. The soldier was protecting 
himself with a pike, holding it with both hands. Geralt chopped at the pole, severing fingers. 
He spun, causing another large cut, screams of pain and a fountain of blood. 
'Mercy!' A lad said on his knees before him, peering through his dishevelled hair. 'Mercy!' 
Geralt spared him, stopping his arm and sword, using the attacking impetus to complete 
his turn. From the corner of his eye he saw the dishevelled young man with a smirk on his 
face and saw what he was holding in his hands. He changed the direction of his movement, 

trying to escape. But he was caught in the crowd. And for a split second he was mired in the 
crowd. 
He could only watch at the pitchfork that was flying towards his body. 
 
*** 
 
The fire in the huge fireplace went out. A gust of wind from the mountains whistled 
through the crevices of the walls and screamed through the improperly closed shutters of 
Kaer Morhen, Home of the Witchers. 
'Damn it!' Eskel said, standing up and going to the cupboard. 'Seagull of vodka?' 
'Vodka,' Geralt and Coen said with one voice. 
'Sure,' interjected Vesemir, hidden in the shadows, 'Yes, of course! Drown your stupidity 
in vodka. Damn fools!' 
'It was an accident...' muttered Lambert. 'She had already mastered the comb...' 
'shut your big mouth, you idiot! I don't want to hear any more! I warned you, if something 
happened to that little girl...' 
'Enough,' Coen interrupted him, softly. 'She sleeps peacefully. Deep and healthy. She will 
wake up a bit sore, but that's it. About the trance, and what happened, she will not even 
remember it.' 
'As long as you remember,' said Vesemir, panting angrily. 'Cabbage heads! Pour for me 
too, Eskel.' 
They were silent for a long time, listening intently to the howling gale. 
'We will need to call someone,' Eskel finally said. 'We will need to bring a sorcerer here. 
What is happening to the girl, it is not normal.' 
'That is her third trance.' 
'But the first time she has spoken clearly.' 
'Repeat to me again what she said,' Vesemir said, emptying his cup in one gulp. 'Word for 
word.' 
'I cannot repeat it verbatim,' Geralt said, staring into the embers. 'But the sense of it, if 
you can make sense of it, was as follows - Coen and I will die. The teeth will be our undoing. 
We will both be killed by teeth. He two. And me three.' 
'It is quite likely,' snorted Lambert. 'that you'll be killed from bites. Teeth can kill any of 
us at any time. But you two, if that prophecy is truly prophetic, will be finished off by some 
very jagged monsters.' 
'Or festering gangrene because of bad teeth,' Eskel agree, apparently quite serious. 'But 
we are not missing any teeth.' 
'I,' said Vesemir reprovingly, 'would not take the matter lightly.' 
The witchers were silent. The wind howled through the walls of Kaer Morhen. 
 
*** 
 
The dishevelled lad, as if afraid of what he had done, let go of the pitchfork. The witcher, 
unable to repress a cry of pain, bent forward, stuck in his belly, the pitchfork unbalanced him 
and he fell to his knees, and slid onto the pavement. Blood spilled with a murmur and a 
splash worthy of a waterfall. 
Geralt tried to stand. Instead he collapsed on his side. 
The sounds that surrounded him, acquired resonances and echoes, heard as if underwater. 
His eyes deceived him, with impaired perspective and completely false geometry. 
He saw the crowd disperse. They escaped from those who were coming to his aid. Zoltan 
and Yarpen with axes, Wirsing with his butcher knife and Dandelion armed with a broom. 

He wanted to scream, where are you going? It is not worth pissing in the wind for me. But 
he could not scream. His voice was stifled by a wave of blood. 
 
*** 
 
It was noon, when the sorceresses arrived in Rivia, within sight of the shiny surface of 
Loc Eskalott, the towers of the castle and the red roofs of the city. 
'We're here,' said Yennefer. 'Rivia. What a curious and entangled destiny.' 
Ciri was excited and Kelpie kept dancing and shuffling on the edge of the road. Triss 
Merigold sighed unnoticed. Rather, she believed it had been unnoticed. 
'Please,' Yennefer looked at he. 'What strange sounds float from you beauteous breast, 
Triss. Ciri, go out and see what lies ahead.' 
Triss averted her face, determined not to give Yennefer any excuse. She sis not expect it 
to work. For a long time she had been sensing Yennefer's anger and aggression growing 
stronger as they approached Rivia. 
'You, Triss,' Yennefer mischievously insisted, 'do not blush, do not sigh, do not drool or 
wiggle around in your saddle. Or is it that you think because I agreed to your request that I 
want to have you with us? That I was interested in seeing you spend a meeting with an old 
love? Ciri, I asked you to go on ahead. The two of us need to talk!' 
'It is not a discussion, it is a lecture,' Ciri dared to argue, but under the threatening glare 
from violet eyes, she immediately recoiled, clucked and galloped off on Kelpie on the road 
ahead. 
'You're not going to meet a loved one, Triss,' Yennefer continued. 'I am not so noble or 
stupid enough to give you the opportunity, or him the temptation. But just for today. I could 
not deny myself the sweet satisfaction. He knows what role you play as a member of the 
Lodge. He will thank you for that with his famous look. And I'll be looking at your quivering 
lips and trembling hands, I will listen to your lame apologies and excuses. And you know 
what, Triss? I will faint with delight.' 
'I knew,' Triss grunted. 'That you would not forget, that you would take your revenge. I 
agreed to this, because I was actually at fault. But one thing I must tell you, Yennefer. Do 
not count too much on fainting. He knows how to forgive.' 
'He knows what was done to him, of course,' Yennefer narrowed her eyes. 'But he will 
never forgive you for what was done to Ciri. And me.' 
'It is possible,' Triss swallowed. 'He may not forgive. Especially if you insist. But he 
won't fly into a rage. He won't lower himself like that.' 
Yennefer flicked her horse with her whip in anger. The animal whinnied and leapt and the 
sorceress swayed in her saddle. 
'Enough talk,' she snapped. 'more humility, you smug viper! He is my man, mine and only 
mine! Do you understand? You have to stop talking about him, to stop thinking about him, 
you have to stop admiring his noble character... As of right now, right now! Oh I want to grab 
you by your matted red hair...' 
'Try it!' screamed Triss. 'Just try it, you vindictive bitch and I'll scratch out your eyes!' I...' 
The both fell silent when they saw the cloud of dust as Ciri galloped back towards them. 
They immediately understood that something was happening. Even before Ciri had reach 
them. 
Above the thatched roofs and red tiles, suddenly shot out red tongues of flame and 
belching clouds of smoke. To the sorceresses ears came a sound like the intrusive buzz of 
flies, or the buzzing of angry bees. Screams grew stronger in counterpoint to the buzzing. 
'What the hell is going on?' Yennefer stood in her stirrups. 'A raid? A fire?' 
'Geralt...' Ciri suddenly groaned, turning as white as paper. 'Geralt!' 

'Ciri? What is the matter?' 
Ciri raised her hand and the sorceresses saw blood running down her palm. Down the life 
line. 
'He has come full circle,' said the girl, her eyes closed. 'e hurt me with the thorn from 
Shaerrawedd, the snake Uroboros biting his own tail. I'm coming, Geralt! I'm coming to you! 
I will not leave you alone!' 
Before the sorceresses were able to protest, she turned Kelpie and immediately went into 
a full gallop. 
They had enough presence of mind to immediately kick their horses into a gallop. But 
their mounts were not able to keep pace with Kelpie. 
'What is it?' shouted Yennefer, cutting the wind. 'What is going on?' 
'You know!' sobbed Triss, galloping at her side. 'Ride, Yennefer!' 
They had ridden between the city's outskirts before they passed their first fugitives fleeing 
from the city, Yennefer was bright enough to know what was happening in Rivia, no fire or 
raid of troops, but a pogrom. She also knew what Ciri had sensed, what -and whom - she was 
rushing too. She knew that she could not catch her. There was nothing she could do. 
Frightened people had compacted into a crowd and she and Triss had to slow their 
mounts to try and get through. Kelpie just jumped, the hooves of the horse knocking off a few 
hats and caps. 
'Ciri! Stop!' 
Before they knew it, they were among the streets crowded with people running and 
screaming. Yennefer, as she rode, saw bodies lying in gutters and noticed bodies hanging by 
their legs from posts and beams. She saw a dwarf lying on the ground, pounded by cudgels, 
she saw another who had been massacred with broken bottlenecks. She heard tormentors 
shout ad the screams of the tortured. She saw a woman thrown out of a window to the waiting 
crowd below an then beaten with sticks. 
The crowd thickened, the roar grew. It seemed that the distance between them and ciri 
had decreased. The next obstacle was a group of halberdiers, who tried to fence the black 
mare in before Kelpie jumped over them. One was knocked to the ground and the rest 
cowered in fright. 
They rushed into a square, which was covered in acrid smoke. Yennefer realised that Ciri, 
undoubtedly guided by a prophetic vision, was heading to the heat of the incident. Where the 
fires burned and murder was raging. 
In the next street there was fighting, dwarves and elves were fiercely defending 
themselves from behind a hastily erected barricade, defending a helpless position, falling and 
perishing under the pressure of the screaming mob that pounced on them. Ciri screamed and 
clung to the neck of her mare. Kelpie rose into the air and jumped over the barricade, not like 
a horse, but lie a huge black bird. 
Yennefer rain into the crowd, but pulled her horse up short, knocking over several people. 
She was pulled from the saddle before she had time to scream. She was beaten on the 
shoulders, on her back and neck. She fell to her knees, and saw an unshaven man, wearing a 
cobbler's apron, who was preparing to kick. 
Yennefer had had enough of being kicked. 
From her extended fingers shot a bolt of blue flame, which whistled like a whip, burning 
the face, torso and arms of the people striking her. It started to smell of burning flesh and the 
screams of pain, raised above the surrounding noise and din. 
'Witch! Elf sorceress!' 
Another man rushed at her brandishing an axe. Yennefer shot flames into his face, his 
eyeballs boiled and them burst, running down his cheeks with a hiss. She relaxed, someone 
grabbed her by the arm, and Yennefer pulled ready to shot, but it was Triss. 

'Let's go... Yenna... Run!' 
I've already heard that voice, Yennefer thought. From those lips that look wooded, 
without a droplet of saliva to wet them. from those lips that is paralysed with terror and 
shakes with panic. I've already heard that voice. On the Hill at Sodden. 
When I was dying in fear. 
Now he is dying in fear. Until the end of my days I'm going to be scared to death. Because 
those who do not break the cowardice, will be scared to death until the end of their days. 
The fingers that Triss dug into her arm were like steel, Yennefer liberated herself from the 
grip with a great effort. 
'Run if you want!' she shouted. 'Hide under the skirts of the Lodge! I have to nothing left 
to defend! I will not leave Ciri alone! Or Geralt! Begone! Get out of my way if you 
appreciate your skin!' 
The crowd keeping her away from her horse, retreated before the rays given off by the 
hands and eyes of the sorceress. Yennefer shook her head, ruffling her black curls. she seem 
to be fury incarnate, the avenging angel, with her flaming sword. 
'Return home, scum!' she cried, leaping at the crowd with a fiery whip. 'Run! Otherwise 
catch fire like cattle!' 
'It's just one witch, people!' A sonorous voice rang from the crowd. 'One cursed elf witch!' 
'She's alone! The other has fled! Hey, bring us the stones!' 
'Death to non-humans! Death to witches!' 
'To the gallows with her!' 
The first stone whizzed past her ear. The second hit her in the shoulder and rocked her 
back. The third struck her in the face. Pain exploded behind her eyes, then everything was 
wrapped in black velvet. 
 
*** 
 
She came to, and groaned in pain. Both of her forearms and wrists ached like crazy. She 
mechanically fumbled around and noticed several layers of bandages. She groaned again, 
without words, desperate. With regret that this was not a dream. And regretting to have not 
succeeded. 
'It did not work,' Tissaia de Vries said, sitting next to the bed. 
Yennefer wanted a drink, something to wet her sticky lips. But she did not ask. Her pride 
would not allow it. 
'It did not work,' said Tissaia de Vries. 'But not because you did not try. You cut yourself 
deeply and accurately. Therefore, I am now with you. If you did not mean it seriously, if it 
was just a ridiculous, bogus exhibition, I have only contempt for you. But you cut yourself 
deep. Seriously.' 
Yennefer numbly stared at the ceiling. 
'I will take care of you, girl I think you are worth it. I'll work with you here. It will not be 
easy. I have to straighten the spine and flatten the hump. But I also have to treat those hands. 
When you cut your veins, you severed tendons. And the hands of a sorceress are a very 
important instrument, Yennefer.' 
Moister on her lips. Water. 
'You'll live,' said Tissaia factually, seriously, even severe. 'Your time is yet to come. But 
when it arrives, you'll remember this day.' 
Yennefer eagerly suck moisture from a stick wrapped in a wet dressing. 
'I'll take care of you,' echoed Tissaia de Vries, touching her hair gently. 'And now... We're 
here alone, without witnesses. Not one is looking at us, and I'm not going to say anything to 

anyone. Cry, girl. Pour it all out. Make it your last cry. Starting now you will never cry. There 
is nothing more pathetic than a sorceress in tears.' 
 
*** 
 
She came too, coughing and spitting blood. Someone had dragged her across the ground, 
it was Triss, she was met by the smell of her perfume. Close to them, on the pavement, shod 
hooves rang, with a vibrated clang. Yennefer saw a rider in full armour, with a white shield 
with a red chevron, from the height of his saddle he was whipping the crowd. Stones hurled 
by the mob bounced harmlessly off on the armour and helmet. The horse neighed and kicked 
out. 
Yennefer felt that instead of an upper lip, she had a big potato. At least one front tooth 
was chipped or knocked out and it hurt to talk. 
'Triss...' she stammered. 'Teleport us out of here!' 
'No, Yennefer,' Triss's voice was very quiet and very cold. 
'They'll kill us...' 
'No, Yennefer. I will not run away. I will not hide under the skirts of the Lodge. And even 
though it I am ready to faint with fear, like at Sodden, I will get over it!' 
Near the entrance of the alley, on the ledge of a wall covered with moss, had formed a 
large pile of manure, debris and trash. It was a colossal heap. A splendid hill. 
The crowd had finally managed to knock the knight from his horse. He was dragged to 
the ground with a terrible crash and the mob crawled over him like lice. 
Triss grabbed Yennefer and dragged her towards the pile of rubbish and raised her hands. 
She shouted a spell with such rage, that the crowd fell silent for a moment. 
'They will kill us,' Yennefer spat blood. 
'Help me, Yennefer, 'Triss stopped for a moment. 'help me. Let's cast Alzur's Thunder...' 
That will kill five, thought Yennefer. Then the rest will tear us apart. But okay, Triss. I 
will not run away. You will not see me run. 
She joined in the enchantment. And they shouted in duet. 
The people stared at them blankly, staring, but quickly recovered. They again began 
throwing stones at the sorceresses. Triss felt one whizz pass her head, but did not flinch. 
It won't work, thought Yennefer. The spell will not work. We cannot conjure up 
something as complicated as Alzur's Thunder. It was said that Alzur had a voice like a bell 
and superior diction. And we are babbling and crying the words and melody... 
She was ready to stop the chant and use her remaining strength to concentrate on some 
other spell, something to teleport them, or to distract the charging mob - if only for a second - 
with something unpleasant. But it turned out it was not necessary. 
The sky darkened suddenly with clouds over the city. The shadows spread quickly. And a 
cold wind rose. 
'Oh,' said Yennefer. 'It seems that you did it...' 
 
*** 
 
'Merigold's Hailstorm,' said Nimue. 'Basically, the name is used illegally, since the magic 
has never been registered, and no one has been able to repeat it. The reason is simple - Triss 
had an injured mouth and spoke slurred and distorted. Some also claim that fear affected her 
language.' 
'I do not believe it,' Condwiramurs pursed her lips. 'In the annals there is no shortage of 
other examples of courage and heroism from Venerable Triss, some even call her chronically 

fearless. But I wanted to ask you about something else. On version of the legend has it that 
Triss was not alone on Rivia Hill. That Yennefer was also there with her.' 
Nimue looked at the watercolour depicting a black mountain, steep and sharp as a knife, 
against dark blue clouds. At the top of the hill could be seen a slender silhouette of a woman 
with outstretched arms and red hair. 
Through the fog that covered the surface of the water came the rhythmic clatter of the 
Fisher King's oars. 
'If anyone was there with Triss,' said the Lady of the Lake, 'they did not survive the vision 
of the artist.' 
 
*** 
 
'It seems that you did it,' said Yennefer. 'Watch out, Triss!' 
From the black clouds over the city of Rivia fell a barrage of icy hailstones the size of 
hens eggs. They beat down so hard they broke rooftops. They fell so densely that they 
covered the streets and squares in a thick layer of ice. The crowd swayed, people fell, 
covering their heads, hiding under one another and fleeing and falling on the slippery ground, 
rolling about and crowding the archways under ledges. Not everyone managed to escape, 
some remained lying on the ice like dead fish, which was heavily dyed with blood. 
Hail rattled on the magical shield that Yennefer was able to throw up at the last minute 
above both sorceresses and threatened to break through. She did not try any other spells. She 
knew what had been done, could not be stopped, an elemental force had been accidently 
unleashed and had to reach its climax. Which it would soon reach. 
That was the hope, at least. 
Lightning flashed and thunder boomed until the surrounding houses were shaken to their 
foundation. All beat all around with a devastating effect. The sky began to brighten. From a 
cleft in the clouds appeared sunlight. Triss made a strange cry or sob from her throat. 
Hail sparkled in the sun like diamonds. They were still falling, but the biggest downpour 
had abated, Yennefer could tell by the pounding on the magical shield, then the hail stopped. 
Suddenly, as if cut off. Guards stormed into the street, the shoes of their horses scraped on the 
ice. The rabble screamed and fled, whipped by whips and beaten with the flats of swords. 
'Bravo, Triss,' croaked Yennefer. 'I don't know what that was... But it was effective.' 
'There was something to defend,' croaked Triss Merigold - heroine of the hill. 
'There always is. We better run, Triss. Because it is probably not over yet.' 
 
*** 
 
That was the end. The sorceresses hail that they had launched at the city had cooled the 
hot heads. So much so that the army dared to intervene and restore order. Until then the 
soldiers had been afraid. They knew what they were threatened with in case of an attack by 
the feverish crowd with a thirst for death and who fears nothing. However, the explosion of 
the elements tamed the many-headed beast and the army charged and did the rest. 
The hail was a terrible disaster for the city. And so, men who had moments ago tried to 
kill a dwarf by smashing his head against a wall, now sobbing, looked at what remained of 
his house. 
In Rivia all was quiet. If it had not been for the two hundred massacred corpses and some 
burning houses, you might have thought that nothing had happened. 
In the Elms district, next to Loc Eskalott, over which burned a rainbow in the sky, and the 
weeping willows reflected in the clear mirror of the water, the birds sang again and the grass 
smelled wet. Everything looked idyllic. 

Even the witcher who lay in a pool of blood in which Ciri knelt. 
 
*** 
 
Geralt lay senseless, white as chalk. He lay motionless, but when they reached him, he 
began to cough, and to spit blood. He began to shake and to tremble so violently that Ciri 
could not hold him. Yennefer knelt beside him. Triss saw her hands shaking. Suddenly she 
felt very weak and her vision blurred. Someone grabbed her, preventing her from falling on 
the ground. She recognised Dandelion. 
'It won't work,' said Ciri's voice, radiating despair. 'Your magic cannot cure him, 
Yennefer.' 
'We arrived...' Yennefer could barely move her lips. 'We're too late.' 
'Your magic won't work, 'Ciri repeated as if she had not heard. 'Is this what it is worth, all 
of your magic?' 
You're right, Ciri, Triss thought, feeling something catch in her throat. We can produce 
hail, but we cannot ward off death. Although apparently the latter is easier. 
'We sent for physician,' said a dwarf standing next to Dandelion, in a husky voice,. 'but 
he has not appeared...' 
'it is too late for a doctor,' Triss said, surprising herself that her voice sounded so calm. 
'He is dying.' 
Geralt continued to stir, coughing blood, then becoming very tense and froze. Dandelion, 
still holding Triss, sighed in despair, the dwarf cursed. Yennefer moaned, her face changing 
suddenly, contracted and ugly. 
'There is nothing more pathetic,' said Ciri sternly, 'than a sorceress in tears. You taught 
me that. But now you're pathetic Yennefer. You and your magic, which is useless.' 
Yennefer did not reply. She could barely hold Geralt's head in both of her hands, while 
repeating a spell. In her hands, the witcher's cheeks and forehead crackled with blue sparks. 
Triss know how much energy was required for that spell. She also knew that the spell 
would not help. She was even more confident that the spell would prove powerless for 
someone who was sterile. It was too late. The spell only exhausted Yennefer. Triss was 
surprised that the black-haired sorceress was able to withstand for so long. 
Then she ceased to be surprised because Yennefer stopped in the middle of the magic 
formula and fell on the pavement next to the witcher. 
One of the dwarves swore again, the other bowed his head in silence. triss Merigold still 
being propped up sniffed loudly. 
Suddenly it got very cold. The surface of the lake boiled like a witch's cauldron and was 
enveloped in mist. The fog grew rapidly, it swirled over the water and stood on the waves., 
covering them in a think white milk, that stifled and sounds and made shapes and figures 
vanish. 
'I,' Ciri said slowly, still kneeling on the bloody ground, 'I once gave up my power. If I 
didn't, I could save him now. I could cure him. I know it. But it is too late, I can't do anything. 
It is like I killed him myself.' 
The silence was broken by Kelpie's whinny. Then by Dandelion's muffled gasp. 
They were all stunned. 
 
*** 
 
A white unicorn appeared out of the mist, running light, agile and silent, lifting his 
beautiful head. This was not just anything unusual, they all knew the legend, and the passage 

about the fact that unicorns run lights, agile and silently. What was strange was that the 
unicorn was running on the surface of the lake, and did not even wrinkle the water. 
Dandelion gasped, this time in awe. Triss felt overwhelmed by her emotions. Euphoria. 
The unicorn's hooves rang on the stones of the waterfront. He shook his mane and horn 
and melodically neighed. 
'Ihuarraquax,' Ciri spoke to him. 'I was hoping you'd come.' 
The unicorn came closer, neighing again and digging his hooves into the hard 
cobblestones. He lowered his head, the horn which sprang from his head suddenly blazed 
with light, with a sheen that dispelled the fog. 
Ciri touched the horn. 
Triss gasped loudly when she saw the girl's eyes filled with white heat and her head 
enveloped in a halo. Ciri did not hear her, did not hear anyone. With one hand she touched 
the unicorn's horn, with the other she touched the witcher. From her fingers drifted a ribbon 
of flickering light. 
No one could say how long it lasted. It was unreal. 
Like a dream. 
 
*** 
 
The unicorn snorted, pawed at the ground several times and move his head as if pointing 
at something. Triss looked. Under a canopy of overhanging willow branches she could 
discern a dark outline in the mist. A boat sailing on the water. 
The unicorn once more shook its horn and began to disappear in the white fog. 
'Kelpie,' Ciri said. 'Go with him.' 
Kelpie snorted. She shook her head. Then obediently walked behind the unicorn. Her 
shoes made an echoing sound on the cobblestones. Then the sound abruptly stopped, as if the 
mare had taken flight, disappeared or dematerialised. 
The boat was on the shore, a few moments after the fog dissolved, Triss saw it clearly. It 
was a tatty old barge, formless as a trough in a barn. 
'Help me,' Ciri said, firmly and decisively. 
At first no one knew what the girl wanted help with. The poet was the first to understand. 
Perhaps because he knew the legend that he frequently lectured on and sang its verses. In his 
arms he picked up Yennefer. He marvelled at how small and light she was. He would have 
sworn that someone helped him lift her. He would have sworn that he felt Cahir's arms 
helping. That he caught a glimpse of Milva's braid. He would have sworn that when he took 
the sorceress to the boat, he saw Angouleme's little had holding it steady. 
The dwarves picked up the witcher, Triss helped them, holding his head. Yarpen Zigrin 
blinked for a second, because he saw the two Dahlberg brothers. Zoltan Chivay would have 
sworn that Caleb Stratton help him lift the witcher into the boat. Triss Merigold was sure that 
she could smell the perfume of Lytta Neyd called Coral and in a haze of yellow-green her 
eyes saw Coen of Kaer Morhen. 
These tricks were brought to their minds by the dense fog around Loc Eskalott. 
'Ready, Ciri,' the sorceress said dully. 'You boat is waiting.' 
Ciri brushed the hair from her forehead and sniffed. 
'Apologise to the ladies at Montecalvo, Triss,' she said. 'But it can be no other way. I 
cannot stay if Geralt and Yennefer leave. I simple cannot. They must understand.' 
'They must.' 
'Goodbye, Triss Merigold. Take care, Dandelion. Take care all.' 
'Ciri,' Triss whispered. 'Little sister... Let me sail with you...' 
'You do not know what you ask, Triss.' 

'Will I ever see you...' 
'Definitely,' she interrupted. 
She climbed aboard the boat, which rocked and immediately began to move away from 
the shore. It disappeared into the fog. Those on the shore did not hear the slightest splash and 
there was no movement in the water. It was as if it had disappeared, like a ghost. 
For a brief moment they saw the small silhouette of Ciri, they saw her sitting at the 
bottom of the boat as it accelerated swiftly. 
And then there was only fog. 
She lied, thought Triss. I will never see her again. i won't see her, because... Vaesse 
deireadh aep eigean. Something ends. 
'Something ends,' said Dandelion. 
'Something begins,' Yarpen Zigrin finished. 
From somewhere on the other side of the lake a cock crowed loudly. 
The fog began to rapidly lift. 
 
*** 
 
Geralt opened his eyes irritated by the play of light and shadow through his closed 
eyelids. He saw above him leaves, a kaleidoscope of leaves glistening in the sun. He also saw 
branches full of apples. 
He felt the delicate touch of fingers on his temple and his cheek. Fingers he knew. He 
loved her so much that it hurt. His stomach, chest and ribs aches, and a corset of tight 
bandages convinced him completely that the pitchfork in the city of Rivia had not been a 
nightmare. 
'Lay quietly, my love,' said Yennefer. 'Lay quietly. Do not move.' 
'Where are we, Yen?' 
'Does it matter? We are together. you and me.' 
The birds sang. It smelled of herbs, rosemary flowers and apples. 
'Where is Ciri?' 
'She is gone.' 
She shifted and gently freed her arm from under his head, and lay beside him on the grass 
so that she could look into his eyes. She looked eagerly, as if she would memorise his image, 
as if to save it for the future, for all eternity. He also looked at her as nostalgia gripped his 
throat. 
'We were in a boat with Ciri,' Geralt recalled. 'On a lake. the on a river with a strong 
current. Among the fog.' 
He fingers found his hand and squeezed hard. 
'Lay still, my love. Lay still. I'm with you. It does not matter what happened, it does not 
matter where we were. Now I'm with you. I will never leave you. Never.' 
'I love you, Yen.' 
'I know.' 
'Nevertheless,' he sighed. 'I'd like to know where we are.' 
'Me too,' Yennefer said, quietly, after a while. 
 
*** 
 
'And that,' Galahad asked, 'is the end of the story?' 
'Certainly not,' said Ciri, rubbing one foot against the other, trying to get rid f the sand 
sticking to her feet. 'You want it to end? I do not!' 
'So what happened next?' 

'The normal,' she snorted. 'They got married.' 
'Tell me.' 
'What's to tell? The celebrate with a big wedding. They invited everyone - Dandelion, 
Mother Nenneke, Iola and Eurneid, Yarpen Zigrin, Vesemir, Eskel... Coen, Milva, 
Angouleme... And Mistle. I was there too, and we were drinking wine and mead. And they, 
Yennefer and Geralt, built a house and the live there happily ever after. Like in a fairytale. Do 
you understand?' 
'Why are you crying, Lady of the Lake?' 
'I'm not crying, the tears in my eyes are from the wind!' 
There was a long silence and they watched the sun go down over the mountain peaks. 
'Upon my soul,' Galahad said after a while. 'It was a unheard of story. Strange is the world 
from which you came, Lady Ciri.' 
She sniffed loudly. 
'Yes,' continued Galahad, clearing his throat a few times, somewhat depressed by the 
silence. 'But here in our lands, adventure occurs, worthy of wonder. Take for example what 
happen with Lord Gawain and the Green Knight... Or my uncle Bors and Tristan... Listen 
then, Lady Ciri. Lord Bors and Lord Tristan were riding to the west, towards Tintagel. Their 
path led them through a wild and threatening forest. They continued to ride and keep a 
careful watch. Then there appeared a white deer and next to it a lady, dressed all in black, as 
black as anything you have seen in your nightmares. And that lady was beautiful, more 
beautiful than any lady in the world, well not Lady Guinevere... The knights saw the lady 
standing next to the deer and waved and she told them this...' 
'Galahad.' 
'Yes?' 
'Be quiet.' 
He coughed, and fell silent. Both were silent staring at the sun. they stayed that way for a 
long time. 
'Lady of the Lake?' 
'I asked you not to call me that.' 
'Lady Ciri?' 
'Go ahead.' 
'Come with me to Camelot, Lady Ciri. You have to meet King Arthur, he will show you 
honour and reverence... I will... I will always love and worship...' 
'Get up! Or not. While you are kneeling you can rub my feet. they are hurting me terribly. 
Thank you. you are very kind. I said my feet! Feet end at the ankles.' 
'Lady Ciri?' 
'I'm still here.' 
'The sun is about to set...' 
'That's the truth,' Ciri bent down and buckled her shoes, then stood up. 'We'll saddle the 
horses, Galahad. Is there somewhere around here where we can spend the night? Ha! From 
your look I can see you know this land about as well as me. But no matter, let us set out, 
whether to sleep in the open or in the woods. Let's not let twilight catch us near the lake. The 
night will be very cold here... What are you looking at?' 
'Oh,' she said seeing the young man blush. 'You're smiling at the thought of spending the 
night in a carpet of moss bed under a hazel bush? In the arms of a fairy? Listen well, young 
man, I do not have the slightest desire...' 
She paused, looking at his blush and sparkling eyes. Seeing something there, in his face, 
which was not really ugly. Something squeezed her stomach and gut, and it was not hunger. 
Something is happening to me, she though. What's wrong with me? 
'Do not bother!' she almost cried. 'Let's saddle the horses!' 

When they were in the saddle, she looked at him and laughed out loud. He looked at her, 
his eyes filled with amazement and questions. 
'Nothing, nothing,' she said easily. 'It was just something I was thinking. Led the way, 
Galahad.' 
Carpet of moss, she thought, holding back a chuckle. A hazel bush. And me in the role of 
a fairy. Well, well. 
'Lady Ciri...' 
'What?' 
'Will you come with me to Camelot?' 
She held out her hand. He held out his hand. Holding hands, they rode side by side. 
The devil, she thought, why not? I bet any money that this world has jobs for a witcheress. 
'Lady Ciri?' 
'Let's not talk about it now. Let's ride.' 
They rode off towards the sunset. Behind them they left a darkening valley. Behind them 
was a lake, and enchanted lake, a lake blue and smooth as a polished sapphire. Behind them 
were left the boulders littering the shore. And pine trees on the slope. 
That was left behind them. 
And everything else was in front of them. 