Chapter Six 
 
 
Jarre, needless to say, was disappointed. The education he received at the temple and his 
own outgoing personality had led him to have faith in human goodness, kindness and 
selflessness. Now there was not much left of that faith. 
He had slept for two night in the open on the remains of haystacks, and now it looked like 
he'd be spending his third night the same way. In each of the villages that he had sought 
shelter or a crust of bread, the gates had been closed up tight and the only responses he 
received were a deep silence of insults and threats. No matter how he explained who he was 
and where and what purpose he was travelling. 
He was very, very disappointed by people. 
It soon grew dark. The boy walked quickly and briskly along a path though some fields. 
He looked around for a haystack, resigned and dejected at the prospect of having to stay 
another night out in the open. In fact, March had been unusually warm, but at night it was 
very cold. And he was afraid. 
Jarre looked to the sky, which, like every night for almost a week, you could see a golden 
and red comet that swept across the sky from west to east, dragging behind it a line of fire. 
He thought about what could cause such a herald, a phenomenon mentioned in many 
prophecies. 
He took up the march. It was getting darker. The path led down a corridor of thick bushes 
that became dark terrifying shapes in the shadows of twilight. From below the bushes where 
darkness reigned blew the cold nasty smell of weeds in a state of putrefaction and something 
more. Something very bad. 
Jarre stopped. He tried to convince himself that what was crawling on his back and 
shoulders was not fear, but cold. It had no effect. 
Ahead a low bridge linked the banks of a canal, black and shiny as freshly poured tar, the 
banks were covered with reeds, willows and deformed ash. In places the bridge had rotten 
planks, and large holes gaped in the bridge, the railing was broken and the rails were 
immersed in water. Around the bridge, willows grew densely. Although it was still far from 
real night, in the distant meadow behind the canal glowed the ragged bits of mist which clung 
to the grass, and among the willows darkness reigned. Through the darkness Jarre caught a 
blurry glimpse of the ruins of a building, probably a mill or a shack. 
I have to cross the bridge, thought the young man. Nothing can be done. Although I can 
feel that something lurks on the other side, I have go to the other side of the canal. I have to 
cross the canal, as did the legendary leader, or was he a hero? Who I read about in the worn 
manuscripts at the temple of Melitele. Cross the canal and then... How was it? The cards will 
be laid out? No, I will cast the dice! Behind me is the past, before me is spread my future... 
He walked to the bridge and immediately saw that his premonition had not failed. Before 
he saw them, he heard them. 
'Well,' growled one of those who now stood in his way. Did I not say? A little patience, 
and we have already encountered somebody.' 
'You were right, Okultich,' replied the other. 'You could set yourself up as a clairvoyant. 
Well, lonesome wanderer, relinquish to us everything you have, will you be good or do we 
have to help?' 
'But I have nothing!' screamed Jarre with all the force in his lungs, hoping that someone 
would hear and come to his aid. 'I am just a poor traveller! I do not have a penny on me! 
What can I give you? This stick? My clothing?' 
'That too,' replied the other with a lisp, something in his voice caused Jarre to shudder. 
'So you know, poor traveller, we expected better loot. Or at least to have fun with a girl from 

the village. But soon it will be night and now nobody will come. But where there is no fish, 
crab must suffice. Take him, guys!' 
'I warn you,' shouted Jarre. 'I have a knife!' 
Indeed he did. He took it with him from the temple's kitchen before he fled and hid it in 
his bag. But he did not reach for it. He was paralysed by the knowledge that it would be an 
absurd gesture and no one would help. 
'I have a knife!' 
'Well, well!' sneered the man with the lisp, approaching. 'He has a knife. Who would 
have thought!' 
Jarre could not flee. Fear had made his legs become two stakes nailed to the ground. 
Adrenaline had tied him by the neck like a noose. 
'Hey!' suddenly cried a third voice, youthful and somehow familiar. 'I think I know him! 
Yes, yes, I know him! Jarre? Do you recognise me? It's Melfi. Do you remember me, Jarre?' 
'I... remember,' Jarre struggled with all of his strength against a powerful, ugly and so far 
completely unknown to him feeling. Only when he felt pain in his side, from hitting the 
planks on the bride, did he realise the sensation. The feeling of the loss of consciousness. 
 
*** 
 
'What a surprise!' repeated Melfi. 'Such a coincidence to meet a native from Ellander. 
And a friend. Isn't it, Jarre?' 
Jarre swallowed the mouthful of bacon, which the strange company had given to him, 
along with some roasted turnips. He did not answer, just nodded his head in the direction of 
all six surrounding the campfire. 
'What direction are you headed, Jarre?' 
'To Vizima.' 
'Ha! We are also headed to Vizima! What a coincidence! What do you say to that, 
Milton? You remember Milton, Jarre?' 
Jarre did not remember. He was not even sure if he had seen him before. Furthermore, 
Melfi, too, was exaggerating a bit calling him a friend. He was the son of the Cooper in 
Ellander. They had both attended the minor seminary in the temple, Melfi had regularly and 
severely beat Jarre and called him a bastard conceived of nettles, without a mother or father. 
It lasted about a year, after which the Cooper had taken his son from school and confirmed 
that the boy was only intended for barrels. That was Melfi – instead of devoting the sweat of 
his brow to learning the secrets of reading and writing, he devoted his sweat and blood in his 
father's workshop, sanding staves. And when he finished his studies, Jarre, with a 
recommendation of the temple found a job as the assistant town clerk, and the journeyman 
cooper bowed deeply to him and assured him of their friendship. 
'Let's go to Vizima,' said Melfi. 'To the army. All of us here, as one group. Those there 
are Milton and Ograbek, sons of serfs, but have been removed from their obligations, you 
know...' 
'I know,' Jarre looked at the two young, blond villagers who were as alike as brothers. 
'They conscript one out of ten fiefs. And you Melfi?' 
'With me,' sighed the cooper, 'mind you, this happened – the first time the army came to 
recruit my father paid them off . But the second time, we had to draw straws... well you 
know...' 
'I know,' Jarre nodded again. 'The draw to enlist was decreed by the city council on 
Ellander, the decreed is dated January sixteenth. It was inevitable against the threat of 
Nilfgaard...' 

'Listen, Pike, to how he speaks,' said on husky, broad-shouldered lad, who first shouted 
at Jarre on the bridge. 'Like some kind of sage.' 
'Wisearse. Fucking know it all,' contributed another of the companions, whose round 
face was pasted with a stupid grin. 
'Shut up, Klaproth,' snarled Pike, the oldest boy in the group, who already boasted 
narrow droopy moustache. 'If he is a sage, the a man should listen to what he says. It doesn't 
hurt to learn something. Learning has never hurt anyone. Well, almost never. And almost 
anyone.' 
'What is true is true,' announced Melfi. 'Jarre, is in fact not stupid. He is a scholar and he 
learned to read and write in Ellander at the temple of Melitele and takes care of their library.' 
'I wonder,' Pike looked at Jarre thought the smoke from the fire, his eyes glistened like an 
actual pike in the light of the torch at the bow of a fishing boat, 'what a scholar is doing on 
the road on the way to Vizima?' 
'Like you,' said Jarre. "I'm going to join the army.' 
'Why would some kind of fucking know it all go and join the army? Sanctuaries do not 
have to supply recruits And every fool knows how to rescue the service and claim to his 
scribe. What is it then, Sir Officer?' 
'I'm going to enlist as a volunteer,' said Jarre. 'I want to enlist out of choice, not 
mandatory conscription. Partly for personal reasons, but mainly from a sense of patriotic 
duty.' 
The group burst into loud, thundering laughter. 
'Look, guys,' said Pike after he caught his breath, 'you can find a double temperament in 
some people seated in contradictions. Two natures. Here is a youngster; he would seem to be 
well educated and experienced and in addition surely not a born fool. You ought to know 
what happens in war – someone attacks someone else and kills them. And he, like you has 
joined by their own volition and person reasons and patriotic obligations but joins the losing 
side.' 
Nobody said anything. Neither did Jarre. 
'Such feelings of patriotic obligations,' said Pike, 'reliably reveal those who are weak in 
the head. But you also spoke about personal reasons. I'm dangerously curious, what are these 
personal motivations?' 
'They are personal,' said Jarre, 'and I'm not going to be talking about them. I'd rather 
you speak of your own reasons.' 
'Pay close attention to what I say,' Pike said after a moment of silence. 'you are not 
talking to some kind of yokel. But do not worry scribe... I will forgive you this time. I'll even 
answer. Yes, I'm going into the army and also as a volunteer.' 
'How weak in the head should someone be to join with the losers?' Jarre was surprised at 
his sudden audacity. 'And on the way, stripping travellers on bridges?' 
'Ha,' Melfi burst out with laughter, 'he still cannot forgive the trap by the stream. Jarre, it 
was just for fun! We were just joking, right, Pike?' 
'Sure,' Pike yawned. 'It was just an innocent prank. Life is sad, like a cow being led to 
the slaughter. People will do anything for fun, don't you think, scribe?' 
'I think. In principle.' 
'That's fine,' Pike did not take his shining eyes off of him. 'Otherwise you would have 
had to make the trip to Vizima alone.' 
Jarre was silent. Pike stretched. 
'I've said what I wanted to say. Well, guys, the fun is at an end, it is time to hit the sack. 
We have until tomorrow evening to get to Vizima, we hike at daybreak.' 
 
*** 

 
The night was very cold, despite his fatigue; Jarre could not sleep, curled up under his 
blanket, his knees almost touching his chin. When he finally feel asleep, he slept poorly and 
nightmares plagued him. Upon awakening he remembered only two. 
In the first dream he saw the Witcher Geralt or Rivia who occasionally visited mother 
Nenneke. The witcher sat motionless under icicles hanging from an overhanging rock and 
was snowed in from a blizzard. In the second dream, Ciri was hunched over a horse's neck, 
galloping towards a low wall of alders. 
Oh yes, and just before dawn he dreamed of Triss Merigold. After he last stay in the 
temple the young man dreamed of the enchantress often. Those dreams had consequences, for 
after waking up he was very ashamed. 
This time, however, nothing of the sort happened. It was just too cold. 
 
*** 
 
In the morning they did indeed march at dawn. Milton and Ograbek, the children of serfs, 
added a note of encouragement by singing a military song: 
 
Go on, brave warrior! 
Your armor rumbles like thunder. 
Don't run, girl, he wants to kiss you. 
Just give it to him, you won't regret it, 
After all, the handsome solider is going to fight for us! 
 
Pike, Okultich, Klaproth and Melfi, walked together like lice on a beggar and told silly 
jokes and anecdotes, which in their opinion were outrageously funny: 
'...And the Nilfgaardian asks "What's that smell?" and the Elf says, "Shit!", Ha, ha, ha!' 
'Hahahahahaha!' 
'Ha, ha, ha, ha! Do you know this one? An elf and a dwarf are going to Nilfgaard...' 
As time passed they met other travellers on the road, walking and driving, farm carts, 
merchants and military units. Some vehicles were loaded with food and Pike walked after 
them with his nose practically pressed to the ground, like a retriever, collecting anything that 
fell off the back – a carrot here, a potato there and sometimes even some onions. Some of the 
food they devoured on the spot and some they saved for later. 
Jarre was waiting for any chance or reason to separate from them. He did not like Pike or 
Okultich. He did not like the looks that Pike and Okultich threw the wagons of the merchants 
who passed or the carts of the farmers with girls and women sitting in the carts. He did not 
like the mocking tone Pike put on when he spoke of his purpose of volunteering for the 
military at a time when it was clear and inevitable they would be defeated. 
The air smelled of freshly ploughed earth. And smoke. In a valley between the regular 
checkerboard fields they saw fruit trees and between them the crowns of a thatched roofs. 
They heard dogs barking, roosters crowing and cattle lowing. 
'Nice village,' Pike said. 'Not to big but neat and rich at first sight.' 
'Here in the valley,' Okultich hurried to explain, 'halflings have settled. They organise 
everything neatly. They are diligent stewards.' 
'Non-humans are cursed,' snarled Klaproth. 'Fucking kobolds. They are thriving here 
while everyone else is in poverty. Not even the war affects them.' 
'For now,' Pike's lip curled back in an ugly grimace. 'Remember this settlement, boys. 
Remember it well. If we ever wanted to take a look there, I would not like to wander.' 
Jarre turned his head. He pretended not to hear. He watched the road in front of them. 

They continued their journey. Ograbek and Milton started singing a new song. Not a 
military song, but something much grimmer. It could have been, after Pike's previous 
references, taken as an ominous sign. 
 
People listen and learn the cruelty of death. 
Old, young or brave, 
No one escapes the Reaper. 
No mercy from his scythe. 
 
*** 
 
'He,' Okultich said quietly, 'must have some money. I'll be damned if he does not have 
silver.' 
The subject for whom Okultich had made the bet was a merchant who was travelling 
along the road, walking with a two wheeled wagon being pulled by a donkey. 
'Money calls money,' Pike lisped, 'and the little donkey would also be worth something. 
Lead the way, boys.' 
'Melfi,' Jarre pulled on the cooper's sleeve, 'open your eyes! Do you not see what is 
brewing here?' 
'These are just jokes, Jarre,' Melfi pulled away. 'They are only joking...' 
Close up they could see that the cart was also a stall that he could set up in a few 
moments to spread his wears ready for sale. The cart was covered with a tarpaulin which 
doubled as a sign that praised the shopkeepers range – protective amulets, talismans and 
scapulars, roots and medicinal drugs, magic potions and all sorts of spices, elixirs and 
magical poultices, precious metal detectors as well as infallible bait for fish, ducks and 
maidens. 
The merchant, a thin elderly man, looked around and saw them, swore and urged his 
donkey forward. But the donkey like any ass did not go faster. 
'He's wearing a pretty decent outfit,' Okultich quietly appreciated. 'And I'm sure we'll 
find things in the cart.' 
'Well, boys, let's get to it,' Pike commanded, 'while there are few witnesses on the road.' 
Jarre could not believe his courage, when he ran a few quick steps ahead of the gang, 
turned and stood between them and the merchant. 
'No!' he uttered with difficulty, as if his throat was being squeezed. 'I won't let you...' 
Pike carelessly parted his long cloak and pointed at a knife on his belt, which was without 
a doubt sharp as a razor. 
'Move aside, pen-pusher!' Pike lisped with hatred. 'If you want to save your throat. I 
thought you were looking for adventures with our company, but no, I see your temple has 
made you a prude, you stink of incense. Get out of the way now, because otherwise...' 
'What is happening here? Huh?' 
From behind the bushes at the side of the road, emerged two eccentric looking figures. 
Both men wore waxed moustaches curled upwards that looked like a colourful danish pastry, 
they wore quilted jackets decorated with ribbons and big, soft, velvet berets with tufts of 
feathers. In addition they wore wide belts with hanging daggers and both men wore on their 
backs two-handed swords, about a meter in length, with long hilts. 
The landsknecht emerged from the bushes after having apparently fulfilled their 
necessary requirements. Although they behaved with ostentatious carelessness and did not 
reach towards their swords, Pike and Okultich immediately backed away and went limp and 
Klaproth looked like a deflated bladder. 
'We... we're not...' stammered Pike. 'Nothing wrong with...' 

'Just a joke,' whined Melfi. 
'No one was hurt,' the old merchant said unexpectedly. 'So no big deal.' 
'We,' Jarre said quickly, 'are on our way to Vizima. We have to report for conscription. 
By chance maybe that is the way you are travelling, gentlemen soldiers?' 
'By chance we are,' chuckled the landsknecht, who immediately understood what was 
going on. 'We are also going to Vizima. Whoever is interested can go with us. We will be 
safer together.' 
'In any case,' the other landsknecht measured Pike and his henchmen with penetrating 
eyes. 'I would like to add that we met a sheriff's patrol a short distance away. His men are 
angry they have to trudge through the country, instead of sitting somewhere warm. They are 
keen to hang any robbers they find on the roads.' 
'Very well,' Pike recovered and showed his teeth in a fake smile. 'Very well, the law 
punishes rogues and keeps order. Then let us be on our way to Vizima, to the army, because 
patriotic duty calls.' 
The landsknecht looked at him for a long time and rather contemptuously, then shrugged 
his shoulders, adjusted the sword on his back and walked by. His companion, Jarre and the 
merchant and his wagon and donkey followed him, and a short distance behind, Pike's mob. 
'I thank you, gentlemen soldiers,' said the merchant driving his donkey. 'And I thank 
you, your sir.' 
'You're welcome,' the landsknecht waved his hand. 'It happens.' 
'A wide range of people are being recruited for the military, 'said the second fellow 
looking back over his shoulder. 'They arrive at a village or a town and order one out of every 
ten men. Often the first thing they do is take advantage of the opportunity to get rid of the 
crooks, which is worse, because then the road become full of robbers. Oh, like those back 
there. However, once they reach the training center a soldier will club some discipline into 
them. Everyone learns to listen when they are forced to run down a corridor of sticks a few 
times.' 
'I,' Jarre was quick to clarify, 'wish to enlist as a volunteer, not forced.' 
'I noticed right away,' the landsknecht looked at him, 'you're a different breed from those 
rascals. So why are you with them?' 
'Chance brought us together.' 
'I have seen many such pairings,' said the experienced soldier seriously, 'which together 
by chance led them to the gallows. Take a lesson from that, my boy.' 
'I will.' 
 
*** 
 
Before the clouds obscured by sun it stood at its zenith, they reached the highway. There 
awaiting them was a large group of travellers who had arrived before them, Jarre and his 
companions had to stop because the road was completely blocked by military troops. 
'They're heading south,' said one of the landsknechts. 'To the front. To Maribor and Mayena.' 
'Look at their banners,' nodded the other. 
'Redania,' said Jarre. 'Silver eagle on purple.' 
'Smart boy,' said the landsknecht patting him on the shoulder. 'Yes, it is Redanian 
soldiers that have been sent to help by Queen Hedwig. Finally the kingdoms are united again 
– Temeria, Redania, Aedirn and Kaedwen, now we are allies for a common cause.' 
'It's about time,' Pike said from behind them with obvious sarcasm. The landsknecht 
looked, but said nothing. 

'Let's sit down,' Melfi said. 'Get some rest. The crowd of troops is not near the end, it 
will take a while before the path is clear.' 
'We can sit on that hill,' the merchant pointed. 'We will have a better view.' 
The Redanian light cavalry passed rapidly past them, raising dust. Behind them marched 
the crossbowmen. Behind them came a column of heavy cavalry. 
'Those,' Melfi pointed to an armoured knight, 'march under another banner. A black 
standard, dotted with white speckles.' 
'From what sunken hole did you climb?' the landsknecht shook his head. 'You do not 
know the banner of your own king? These are the silver lilies, you blockhead...' 
'Black field covered with silver lilies,' Jarre said, who wanted to show that he definitely 
climbed from no hole, and hurriedly explained – 'The old coat of arms of the Kingdom of 
Temeria was a striding lion. Only the crown princes used a different standard to put on their 
shields, the three fleur de lys. The heraldic symbolisms of the lilies are a sign of the crown 
prince, heir to the crown and sceptre...' 
'Fuckin know it all,' muttered Klaproth. 
'Shut your mug, pig heads,' warned the landsknecht. 'And you, my boy, keep going. This 
interests me.' 
'When prince Goidemar, son of old King Gardic went to fight Falka's evil insurgents, the 
army fought under this under the coat of arms of the lilies, making a decisive advantage. And 
when Goidemar inherited the throne from his father, in memory of those victories and the 
miraculous salvation of his wife and children from enemy hands, he instituted the coat of 
arms of three lilies on a black filed for his kingdom. And then King Cedric changed the 
official flag by special decree, so now it is a field strewn with silver lilies. And this is 
Temeria's crest today. Which you can visually verify without difficulty, since on the road 
move Temerian spearmen.' 
'You explained that very well, young sir,' praised the merchant. 
'Not I,' said Jarre, 'but Jan of Attre, a scholar of heraldry. 
'And obviously you are as well versed.' 
'Fucking great then,' said Pike in a low voice, 'that he is being recruited by the banner of 
the silver lilies, for the king of Temeria.' 
Suddenly they heard singing. The deep, threatening, like an approaching thunder storm. 
Following in the tracks left by the Temerians, came another army in close formation. A grey, 
almost colourless cavalry, over which waved no flags or banners. At the front of the column 
carried on a pole was a horizontal staff decorated with horses' tails from which three human 
skulls hung. 
'The Free Company,' the landsknecht pointed at the riders. 'Condottiere. An army of 
mercenaries.' 
'Even the untrained eye can see that they are seasoned,' Melfi sighed. 'I would serve with 
them. They ride in formation, as if on parade...' 
'The Free Company,' repeated the landsknecht. 'Behold, beardless yokels, those are true 
soldiers. The same condottieri was present at the battle of Mayena- Adam Pangratt, 
Lorenzo Molla, Frontino and Julia Abatemarco where they decided to attack and broke the 
siege and liberated them from Nilfgaard's strength.' 
'In combat they are unyielding as solid rock,' added the other. 'War is a craft for them, 
and they provide their service for money, as you can easily deduce by their songs.' 
The company approached at a walk, their singing thundering above their heads, but with a 
strangely discordant note. 
 
No sceptre nor throne do we serve, 
No alliances with kings, 

We serve the coin, like the golden sun, 
At its order, we swiftly obey! 
 
We do not take your oaths, 
We bow to no flag nor kiss hands, 
We serve the coin, which shines like the sun 
Our oath we give eternal. 
 
'I would like to serve with them,' Melfi breathed again. 'To fight at their side. Capturing 
fortune and fame.' 
'Do my eyes deceive me?' Okultich furrowed his brow. 'Who rides at the head of the 
crowd? A female? Are these mercenaries fighting under the command of women?' 
'She is not just any woman,' growled the landsknecht. 'It is Julia Abatemarco who they 
call Pretty Kitty. All of her enemies tremble before her. This company comprises barely a 
thousand men, but before the gates of Mayena they cut down three thousand Black ones and 
elves.' 
'I heard,' Pike said in a humble, yet disgustingly vitriolic tone, 'that famous victory was 
for nothing, that the gold coins used for their pay was wasted unnecessarily. Nilfgaard 
recovered and again inflicted on our people a good lesson. They besieged Mayena again. 
Maybe even took it. Maybe they are stretching their strength to the north. Maybe they 
Nilfgaard bought these well-paid mercenaries. Maybe...' 
'Maybe,' interrupted the landsknecht coldly, 'you want me to smash your lying mouth, 
bastard! And yet you're lucky, because barking against one's own army is punishable by 
hanging. So hold your tongue before I run out of patience!' 
'Oooh!' the burly Klaproth said, opening his mouth widely. 'Oh, look at you! Dwarfs are 
more fun!' 
On the road, under the deafening din of drums, the blaring of bagpipes and the shrill 
whistle of fifes, marched a formation of infantry armed with halberds, battle-axes and spiked 
flails. Clad in pointed helmets, leather and chain shirts were soldiers far smaller than usual. 
'Dwarves of the mountains,' said the landsknecht. 'Some of the regiments of the 
Mahakam Volunteer Army.' 
'I thought,' said Okultich, 'the dwarves fought against us. That these filthy tadpoles 
betrayed us to the Black ones...' 
'You thought?' the landsknecht looked at him with pity. 'I wonder what with? If you 
swallowed a cockroach in you soup, dolt, you would have more intellect in your gut than in 
your head. Those who march there are one of the dwarven regiments of infantry, sent to aid 
us by Brouver Hoog, Governor of Mahakam. They have already entered combat, suffering 
heavy casualties during the battle of Mayena they drove back the Black ones.' 
'Dwarves are brave people,' confirmed Melfi. 'I met one once, at an inn in Ellander 
during the celebration of Saovine and he gave me such a slap in the ear that I had a ringing in 
them until the feast of Yule. 
'The regiment of dwarves is the last column,' the landsknecht shaded his eyes with his 
hand. 'End of the parade. The road will be free soon. Let's get moving it is almost noon.' 
 
*** 
 
'So many people are moving arms to the south,' nodded the merchant. 'There will be a 
great war, a great misfortune. People will perish by fire and sword by the thousands. Did you, 
gentlemen, see the comet in the firmament night after night, dragging a red tail behind it? 
When a comet has a pale tail, it announces disease and epidemics, plague, cholera and 

leprosy, a comet with a bluish tail portents disaster, floods, cloudbursts, or prolonged rain. A 
red colour indicates that t is a comet of fire and blood and iron that are born of fire. Severe 
disasters will fall on people, death and bloodshed. What is said in the old prophecy – corpses 
will cover the earth, hear the howl of the wolves and those who miraculously survive, will cry 
with happiness when they find traces of another living person... Woe to us!' 
'Why us?' the landsknecht interrupted coldly. 'The comet is flying high, certainly it can 
be seen from Nilfgaard. And the Ina valley, where Menno Coehoorn camps. If it can be seen 
by the Black ones, why not believe that it portends disaster and misfortune for them and not 
us.' 
'Right!' agreed the second landsknecht. 'Woe to the Black ones!' 
'You, gentlemen, are exceedingly clever.' 
'Absolutely.' 
 
*** 
 
They left the woods and went into meadows and pastures surrounding Vizima. Here 
grazed herds of horses used for riding and towing. Now in March, the grass in the meadow 
was scarce, but in the meadow stood wagons filled with hay. 
'I cannot believe my eyes,' Okultich licked his lips. 'Herds of horses and no one watching 
them! Just choose one and...' 
'Shut up,' growled Pike from between his teeth, smiling at the mercenaries, 'This one, 
gentlemen, is dying to serve in the cavalry. He enjoys looking at horses.' 
'Serve in the cavalry?' the landsknecht spluttered. 'Have no illusions of riding on 
horseback. Such as you would be useless unless you were cleaning the stables or moving 
manure with a bucket and wheelbarrow!' 
They continued on and soon arrived at the dock that ran along the ponds and channels. 
And suddenly above the tops of the alder spotted the red-tiled towers of Vizima castle which 
stood by the river. 
'We're almost there,' said the merchant. 'Can you smell it?' 
'Pu-ugh!' Melfi cried. 'What a stink! What is it?' 
'Probably the soldiers who have died waiting for the king to pay them,' muttered Pike 
form behind them, but so the landsknechts could not hear. 
'A wonder your snout doesn't break, huh?' laughed one of them/ 'We are approaching the 
camp, where during the winter thousands of troops camped. An army has to eat and shit too. 
So it was established by nature and nothing that can be remedied! And all that shit has to go 
somewhere. Like in those pits over there, where they go and cover it with soil. In winter, it 
remains frozen and you can withstand it a bit, but come spring... Pah!' 
'Do you hear that buzz?' the second landsknecht sniffed. 'There are clouds of flies and in 
the spring it will be an unheard of thing. Cover your face as best you can, because these flies 
go rampaging through the mouth and eyes. Let's pick up the pace, the faster the better.' 
 
*** 
 
They left the trenches behind, but failed to lose the smell. On the contrary, Jarre would 
have given his head, the closer to the city, the worse the smell got. And much more diverse. 
The smell surrounded the city stank of military camps and tents. It smelled of hospitals. I 
stank of crowded and busy boroughs, squares and streets, the walls above the city stank. 
Luckily the nostrils soon grew accustomed to it and could not tell the difference between 
either dung or carrion or whether it was cat urine or the next inn. 

Flies where everywhere. Buzzing annoyingly like experienced soldiers, crawling into 
mouths, noses, eyes and ears. The insects could not be driven off and it was easier to crush 
them on their faces. 
As they left the darkness of the city gate, Jarre's eye fell upon a huge poster of a painted 
knight, who pointed his finger at him. The inscription beneath the knight in capital letters 
read – WHAT ABOUT YOU? HAVE YOU ENLISTED? 
'Yes,' muttered the landsknecht. 'Unfortunately.' 
There were many similar signs, hung on almost every available wall. Most were of the 
knight pointing his finger, often also with a pathetic looking mother with billowing grey hair, 
standing in the background of burning villages and babies impaled on Nilfgaardian stakes. 
Another popular motif was pictures of elves with bloody knives in their teeth dripping blood. 
Jarre turned around and suddenly realised they were alone – the landsknecht, the 
merchant, and himself. Pike, Okultich, Klaproth, Melfi and the rural recruits were gone 
without a trace. 
'Well, well,' the landsknecht confirmed his conjectures looking around inquisitively. 'As 
I expected, your comrades took off at the first opportunity, rascals, gave us the slip at the first 
corner. But you know what I'll tell you, boy? Be glad that your paths diverged. And wish that 
you had never met.' 
'I'm sorry for Melfi,' Jarre murmured. 'He is not a bad person.' 
'Each person chooses his own destiny. Come with us. We will show you were to recruit.' 
They entered a square with a stone platform in the center, on it stood a pillory. 
Around the pillory townspeople and soldiers thronged. The condemned had mud and shit 
flung at their faces, they were spitting, spluttering, screaming and crying. The crowd laughed. 
'Wow!' cried the landsknecht. 'Look who is locked in the stocks! It's Fuson! I wonder 
why he is in there?' 
'For farming,' a fat burgher in wolf fur and a felt hat hastened to explain.' 
'For what?' 
'For farming,' the fat man repeated with emphasis. 'For planting.' 
'Ha! So you spoke clearly, forgive me,' the landsknecht laughed. 'That's nonsense, I have 
known Fuson for many years. He is a shoemaker, the son of a shoemaker and grandson of a 
shoemaker. In his life it has never occurred to him to plough or sow or reap. Where did you 
come to such a towering pile of shit, sir?' 
'The magistrate read the judgement,' the man said indignantly. 'It is said the criminal will 
stay in the pillory until tomorrow morning for on the command of Nilfgaard he has sown 
some strange, exotic herb. Probably poisonous... Wait, I remember... Oh! Defetyzm!' 
'Yes, yes!' cried the merchant. 'I heard talk of it. The Nilfgaardian spies and the elves are 
spreading epidemics, poisoning wells, springs and streams with various poisons such as 
hemlock, typhoid and defetyzm.' 
'That's right,' said the fat man in the felt cap. 'Yesterday in the square they hanged two 
elves. Surely for such poisonings.' 
'In this street,' the landsknecht pointed, 'is an inn, with a draft board in the office. Good 
luck kid, and perhaps the gods with let us meet in better times. Farewell, and you, Mister 
merchant.' 
The merchant cleared his throat. 
'Kind gentlemen,' said the merchant rummaging through little chests and trunks on his 
cart, 'for your help... As a sign of gratitude...' 
'Do not trouble yourself, good man,' the landsknecht said with a smile. 'Let's not speak 
of it.' 
'How about a magic ointment against arrows?' the old man rummaged through a trunk. 
'Or an effective and versatile tool for the treatment of asthma, gout, paralysis and to remove 

dandruff? Or a balm for bee stings or if you have been bitten by a rabid dog, vipers or a 
vampire? Or a talisman against the evil eye?' 
'And you do not have anything,' the second landsknecht said seriously, 'for the effects of 
bad food?' 
'I have!' cried the merchant. 'Here it is, the most effective antidote developed from 
magical roots, spices and herbs. Three drops will suffice after each meal. Please take it, noble 
lords.' 
'Thank you. Farewell, sir. You too, boy.' 
'Honest and decent gentlemen,' said the merchant, when both the landsknecht 
disappeared into the crowd. 'It's not every day you find people like that. Nor like you, young 
sir! What can I give you then? An amulet against lightning? A bezoar? Turtle pebbles 
effective against spells of charming? Aha! I even have a hanged man's tooth and a piece of 
devil shit...' 
Jarre tore his gaze away from a group of people fiercely washing paint from the wall of a 
house which read – DOWN WITH THE FUCKING WAR! 
'No need,' he said. 'It is time for me...' 
'Ha!' the merchant shouted and pulled out a brass medallion in the shape of a heart. 'This 
is the right thing for a young man. It is truly unique, I have only one such amulet. It is a 
magic charm. It makes the one who carries it never forget his love, even if time and many 
miles separate them. Look, inside is a piece of papyrus, with magical red ink that I have, you 
just write the name of the loved one and she will never forget or betray you. What do you 
think?' 
'Hmmm...' blushed Jarre. 'I don't know...' 
'What name,' the merchant dipped a quill into his magic ink, 'should I write?' 
'Ciri. I mean Cirilla.' 
'Done. Here you go.' 
'Jarre! Bloody hell! What are you doing here?' 
Jarre turned impulsively. I'd hoped, he thought, that I would leave my past behind, that 
everything would be all new and I seem to constantly bump into old acquaintances. 
'Dennis Cranmer!' 
A dwarf dressed in a heavy fur coat, steel armour, arm guards and a fox-skin hat with a 
tail cast a penetrating look at the boy, then the merchant, then again at the boy. 
'What are you doing here Jarre?' he asked sternly, his brows, beard and moustache 
bristling. 
For a moment the boy thought to lie and get the good-hearted merchant to confirm it. He 
immediately gave up this idea. Dennis Cranmer, who had once served in the guard in the 
Principality of Ellander, enjoyed the reputation of being a dwarf who was difficult to deceive. 
And he knew it was not worth the try. 
'I'm going to enlist in the army.' 
He knew what the next question would be. 
'Do you have permission from Nenneke?' 
He did not respond. 
'You ran away,' Dennis Cranmer stroked his beard. 'You fled from the temple. And 
Nenneke and the priestesses are probably pulling out their hair...' 
'I left a letter,' grumbled Jarre. 'Mister Cranmer, I could not... I had to... One cannot sit 
idly by while the enemy is on his border... in a time of threat to one's homeland... and... 
Ciri... Mother Nenneke banned me. She sent three quarters of the sanctuaries girls to the 
army, but she did not want me to go. But I had to...' 

'So you ran away,' the dwarf wrinkled his brow. 'By a thousand sacramental demons! I 
should tie you to a stick and send you back to Ellander. I should order you locked up in a 
cave until the priestesses come and pick you up! I should...' 
He snorted angrily. 
'When was the last time you ate something, Jarre? How long since your throat had a hot 
meal?' 
'Hot meal? Three... No, four days ago.' 
'Come with me.' 
 
*** 
 
'Eat slower, son,' Zoltan Chivay, one of Dennis Cranmer comrades rebuked him. 'Not so 
fast, it's not healthy to swallow without chewing properly. Where are you going in a hurry? 
Believe me; no one is going to take the pot away.' 
Jarre was not so sure. In the main hall of the Hairy Bear inn a duel of fisticuffs was being 
held. Two stubby dwarves as wide as stoves were banging fist together so loud that the noise 
rang over the top of the clamour and cheers from the companions of the regiment. The plank 
floor creaked, dishes fell from shelves and blood from broken noses sprayed the surrounding 
area like rain. Jarre was afraid that one of the opponents would soon roll over the table and 
throw the wooden platter with pork, cooked peas and earthenware pints to the floor. He 
swallowed a chunk of meat without swallowing, because the last few days had taught him 
that anything could befall you. 
'I don't understand, Dennis,' said another dwarf at the table called Sheldon Skaggs, 
without paying attention to the fact that one of the fighters after a hard blow almost rolled 
over his back. 'If the boy is a priest, how is he going to enlist? The blood of priests should not 
be spilled.' 
'He was schooled at the temple, he's not a priest.' 
'Damn, I can never understand those human superstitions. But it is not proper to mock 
other people beliefs... However, since this young man was only brought up in the temple, 
there is nothing against the shedding his blood. Especially Nilfgaard's. What do you say, 
boy?' 
'Let him to eat in peace, Sheldon.' 
'I will answer...' Jarre took a bite of pork with a spoonful of peas. 'I think the spilling of 
blood in a righteous war is permissible and justified. That's why I want to enlist. The 
motherland is calling.' 
'You can see for yourself,' Sheldon Skaggs looked at his companions, 'how much truth 
there is in the assertion that humans are a race closely akin to our own and that we derive 
from the same root, both them and us. The best proof is sitting in front of us and eating peas. 
In other words, the same stupid enthusiasm we see in young dwarves.' 
'Especially after Mayena,' said Zoltan Chivay calmly. 'After winning a battle voluntary 
enlistment always rises. The momentum will cease as soon as the news that Menno Coehoorn 
is heading up the Ina River, leaving land and going by water.' 
'I only wish that the rush was the other way,' muttered Cranmer. 'I do not have 
confidence in the volunteers. It is interesting that every second deserter is a volunteer.' 
'How can you...' Jarre almost choked. 'How can you suggest something like that, sir... I 
volunteer from patriotic motives... For the motherland...' 
One of the dwarves had fallen during the fistfight, the boy thought the he had shaken the 
foundations of the building, because the dust from the cracks in the floor planks rose as high 
as a raised arm. However, this time he stayed down, rather than jumping back up and 

pouncing on his opponent, he lay on the floor, feebly moving his limbs so he looked more 
like a giant beetle on his back. 
Dennis Cranmer stood up. 
'The issue is resolved,' he announced in a thundering voice, looking around the taproom. 
'The post of company commander, vacant after the heroic death of Elkana Foster, killed in 
the field of honour during the battle of Mayena, will be occupied by... What is your name, 
son, I have forgotten?' 
'Blasco Grant!' the winner of the match spat a tooth on the floor. 
'Blasco Grant is the new commander. Does anyone have any objection to his promotion? 
There are none? All right. Innkeeper! Beer!' 
'What were we talking about?' 
'Of a just war,' Zoltan Chivay began to count on his fingers. 'Of the volunteers. Of the 
deserters...' 
'Oh, that!' Dennis interrupted him. 'I knew I wanted to explain something concerning 
volunteers, deserters and traitors. I remember the late volunteer army for the Marshal of 
Cintra, Vissegerd. The motherfuckers, it turns out, have not even changed their banner. I 
know this from the condottieri of the Free Company from Julia "Pretty Kitty". At Mayena 
they encountered the Cintrans. Those sons of bitches were fighting alongside Nilfgaard under 
the banner of the golden lion...' 
'Called on by their motherland,' Skaggs said gloomily. 'And the future Empress Cirilla.' 
'Shh,' said Dennis. 
' Right,' said the fourth dwarf Yarpen Zigrin who had been silent up until now. 'Hush! 
And quieter than silence. But not because of fear of spies, but because you cannot talk about 
things you have no fucking idea about.' 
 'And you, Zigrin,' Skaggs puffed out his beard. 'You know something about this?' 
'Aye, I know. I tell you one thing – nobody, not even Emhyr var Emreis, nor those 
treacherous sorcerers from Thanedd, not even the devil himself could force that girl to do 
anything. They did not manage to break her. I know it. Because I know her. It's a hoax this 
whole marriage to Emhyr. A deception that has led many fools astray... Also I'll tell you, 
that girl's destiny is quite different.' 
'You talk,' muttered Skaggs, 'as if you really know her, Zigrin.' 
'Leave him!' Zoltan suddenly scolded. 'Her fate is different. I think so to. I have my 
reasons for it.' 
'Bah!' Sheldon Skaggs replied, shaking his hands. 'Why spend saliva in vain. Cirilla, 
Emhyr, destiny... They are distant issues. Our concern is Menno Coehoorn the Field Marshal 
of the Center Army Group.' 
'Well,' sighed Zoltan Chivay. 'It seems to me that we are not going to escape a battle. 
Perhaps the biggest in known history.' 
'Much will be decided,' muttered Dennis Cranmer. 'A lot will end.' 
'Everything...' Jarre belched and covered his mouth with his hands, embarrassed. 
'Everything ends.' 
The dwarves watched him for a moment, silent. 
'I don't think I fully understand you,' Zoltan finally said. 'Could you explain what you 
mean?' 
'At the royal council in Ellander I heard...' stammered Jarre. 'There was talk about a 
great victory in this war; it was so important that... That this war put an end to all wars.' 
Sheldon Skaggs snorted, spitting beer onto his beer. Zoltan Chivay roared with laughter. 
'What do you think, gentlemen?' 
Now it was Dennis Cranmer's turn to burst out laughing. Yarpen Zigrin retained his 
seriousness. He studied the young man attentively and seemed concerned. 

'Son,' he said very seriously. 'Look. There, sitting at the counter is Evangelina Parr. She 
is admittedly, substantial. Indeed, even great. But despite her actions, not one whore can put 
an end to all whores.' 
 
*** 
 
 When they left the inn, Dennis Cranmer took the young man aside. 
'I have to praise you, Jarre,' he said. 'Do you know why?' 
'No.' 
'Do not pretend. Before me, you do not. It is worthy of praise that you did not blink an 
eye when they mentioned Ciri. Do not look as if you don't know what I mean. I know a few 
things that were happening at Nenneke's temple. I also heard the name that you had entered 
in the heart medallion.' 
The dwarf pretended not to notice the blush that suffused the boy's face. 
'Keep it up, Jarre. And not only about Ciri... What are you looking at?' 
On the wall of a granary visible at the entrance to an alley stood a blurred painting, 
written in lime, which read – MAKE LOVE, NOT WAR. 
Just below, with significantly smaller letters, someone had scrawled the following 
message – MAKE SHIT EVERY MORNING. 
'Look the other way, stupid,' Dennis Cranmer barked. 'Just seeing such inscriptions can 
get you in trouble. Do not say no out of place, or they tie you to a post and whip you bloody. 
Here the trials are very fast! Incredibly fast!' 
'I saw,' Jarre whispered, 'a shoemaker in the pillory. He allegedly sowed defetyzm.' 
'The sowing,' the dwarf said seriously, pulling the boy's sleeve, 'probably consisted of 
the fact that the father was driving his son to the military, and he cried and shouted about 
patriotism. For the more serious sowing there is a different punishment. Come on, I'll show 
you.' 
They entered a small square. Jarre had to pull back and cover his nose and mouth with his 
sleeve. On a huge gallows hung several bodies. Some, from their appearance and smell, had 
been hanging there for some time. 
'That one,' said Dennis, while swatting away flies, 'wrote silly phrases on the walls. He 
said that war is a thing of lords and peasant recruits and that Nilfgaard were not their 
enemies. That one was drunk and told the following anecdote – "What is a spear? The 
weapon nobles stick a poor man at each end." And there, at the end, you see the old woman? 
She was the mistress of a military brothel, and had decorated a sign with this – "Fuck today, 
warrior! Because tomorrow you may not be able to."' 
'And just for that...' 
'One of the girls, it was revealed later, also had gonorrhoea. And that came within the 
paragraph of conspiracy and sabotage of combat capabilities.' 
'I understand, Mister Cranmer,' Jarre took a stance that he considered military. 'But do 
not worry about me; I am not a defeatist...' 
'You do not understand shit and do not interrupt me, I have not finished. The last one that 
was hanged, who stinks already, their only crime was the during a talk with an undercover 
informer, responded saying – "You are correct my friend, it is not." Now you can tell me you 
understand.' 
'I understand,' the boy looked around cautiously. 'I'll be careful. But... Mister 
Cranmer... What is really happening?' 
The dwarf also glanced around carefully. 
'The truth,' he replied in a whisper,' is that the strength of Field Marshal Menno 
Coehoorn's Center Army Group is a hundred thousand men. If there was no rebellion in 

Verden, he would be here. The truth is that neither of our combined armies have enough 
power to stop Coehoorn. At least not before the strategic line of the Pontar.' 
'The river is north of us,' whispered Jarre. 
'Well, you wanted to hear the truth. But remember to keep a lock on your mouth.' 
'I'll be careful. And once I enlist? I have to be careful around the soldiers? In case there is 
a spy among them?' 
'In a combat regiment? Near the front line? On no! Spies are too busy far from the front, 
because they are afraid of ending up there themselves. Also, if every soldier who protested, 
complained or cursed was hanged, there would be no one to fight this war. But your mouth, 
Jarre, as in the case of Ciri, keep it closed. Now come with me, I will escort you to the 
Commission office.' 
'Mister Cranmer,' Jarre looked with hope at the dwarf. 'Will you speak for me there?' 
'You foolish, dandy! This is the Army! If I recommend you and protect you, it is like 
having "milksop" embroidered on your back in gold thread. No one will leave you alone in 
your unit, lad.' 
'What about you...' Jarre asked. 'Does your unit...' 
'Do not even think about it.' 
'Because there is only room for dwarves, it that it?' said the boy bitterly. 'Not for me?' 
'Right.' 
Not for you, thought Dennis Cranmer. Not for you, Jarre. I'm too obliged to Mother 
Nenneke. Therefore I would like you to return from the war. The Mahakam Volunteer Army is 
composed of dwarves, volunteers from inferior races and foreigners, they will always be sent 
into the worst places, the most dangerous sections of the battle. There is no return. To the 
places when humans would not be sent. 
'So what can be arranged,' Jarre frowned, 'to get into a good unit?' 
'And that, according to you is special, for you to seek?' 
Jarre turned, hearing singing, coming on like a wave in the surf, rising as rapidly as an 
approaching thunder storm. The singing was loud and strong and hard as steel. He had heard 
such singing before. 
From the street leading away from the caste, in three columns, marched the condottieri 
regiment. At their head with the standard covered with horses and skulls, was a man with an 
aquiline nose and hair in a braid that fell onto his armour. 
'Adam "Adieu" Pangratt,' murmured Dennis Cranmer. 
The condottieri's singing thundered down the street. 
In counterpoint was the ringing of horseshoes on pavement, which filled the street and 
soared up to the tops of the houses and far up into the blue sky over the city. 
 
We do not mourn wives or lovers 
When bleeding on the earth 
Because the coin, shines like the sun 
For this we fight... 
 
'Which unit?' Jarre said, unable to look away from the cavalry. 'Hopefully one like this! 
In one that would be worthwhile...' 
'Each one has its own anthem,' the dwarf broke the silence. 'But ever soldier must pour 
out his own blood. Either someone will cry for him or not. In war, son, those who sing and 
march are equal, the formations are equal. And then, in battle, everyone must face there own 
destiny. Whether in the Free Company with "Adieu" Pangratt or in the infantry or in the 
camps... In shiny armour with a proud plume or in a lousy fur coat. With a lush stallion or 
with a battered shield... each must face his destiny. Well, here we are at the Commission 

office, can you see the sign above the entrance? Make your way over there if you are still 
thinking of being a soldier. Good luck, Jarre. I'll see you when this is over.' 
The dwarf's eyes followed the boy until he disappeared through the door to the inn, 
occupied by the recruitment box. 
'Or maybe I will not see you,' he added quietly. 'Who knows what is written. What is 
chosen.' 
 
*** 
 
'Can you ride? Shoot a bow or crossbow?' 
'No, Commissioner. But I can control font and calligraphy. I know ancient runes... I 
know Elder Tongue...' 
'Are you skilled with the sword? Using a spear?' 
'I've read the history of wars. Writings by Marshal Pelligram. And Roderick de 
Novembre...' 
'Can you at least cook?' 
'Not well... But I can count...' 
The recruiter rolled his eyes and waved his hand. 
'More intellects. How many more will we get? Write him some papers for the PFI. You 
will serve in the PFI, young man. Take the papers to the south end of town, to the Maribor 
gate, next to the lake.' 
'But...' 
'You should have no problems with it. Next!' 
 
*** 
 
'Hey, Jarre! Wait!' 
'Melfi?' 
'It sure is,' said the journeyman cooper, staggering and leaning against a wall. 'Brrr, I'm 
sick...' 
'What is it?' 
'What do I know? Heh, heh! Nothing! We celebrated a bit. We drank to the defeat of the 
Nilfgaardians. Oh, Jarre, I'm glad to see you. I thought we had lost you somewhere... My 
friend...' 
Jarre stepped back like someone had slapped him. The cooper not only reeked of dirty 
beer and brandy, but also onions, garlic and the devil knew what else. It was unbearable. 
'Where did they go,' he asked mockingly, 'your great comrades?' 
'Let the devil take them,' Melfi grinned. 'You know why I came, Jarre? Because that Pike 
was not a good person.' 
'Bravo. Good for you.' 
 'So you see,' Melfi continued, not noticing Jarre's taunt. 'I was not easy to fool. Do you 
know why he came to Vizima? Do you think he wanted to join the army? You'd be wrong! 
You would not believe what he is up to.' 
'I'd believe it.' 
'He needed horses and uniforms,' Melfi concluded triumphantly. 'He wanted to steal 
them here, because he had an idea of going on bandit raids dressed as a soldier.' 
'He'll end up on the gallows.' 
'I should say so,' said the Cooper, leaning against the wall, unbuttoning his pants. 'I'm 
sorry for Ograbek and Milton, the stupid straw heads let themselves be deceived by Pike and 
they'll end up on the gallows as well. Do you know about yours, Jarre?' 

'Huh?' 
'Where are you assigned?' Melfi asked while urinating on the whitewashed wall. 'I've 
been sent to the Maribor gate. On the south side of town. Where are you going to?' 
'Also, there.' 
'Ha!' the Cooper jumped a few times then buttoned his pants. 'We will fight together?' 
'I think not,' Jarre said with an air of superiority. 'I have been assigned to the unit 
according to my qualifications. The FPI.' 
'Of course,' Melfi hiccupped and burped his hideous drunken breath again. 'You're a 
scholar! You would certainly have an important position. But what can you do? Meanwhile 
we can continue to walk for a time together. After all, we have to go the same way to the 
south side of the city.' 
'It seems so.' 
'Shall we?' 
'Let's go.' 
 
*** 
 
'I don't think this is it,' said Jarre, looking at the tents surrounding a courtyard, where the 
dust stirred around the feet of a company practicing maneuvers with long sticks on their 
shoulders. Each person, the young man realised, had a bundle of hay bound to their right leg 
and a bundle of straw on their left. 
'I think we took a wrong turn, Melfi.' 
'Straw! Hay!' they could hear the roars from the courtyard from a sergeant who was 
addressing the ragged mob. 'Straw! Hay! Pick up the pace, or I'll whore your mother!' 
'There is a flag over the tent,' Melfi said. 'See for yourself, Jarre. These are the same 
lilies you told us about on the road. There is a flag? Yes. There is a camp? Yes. This indicates 
we are in the right place.' 
'Maybe for you. But certainly not for me.' 
'Look, there is someone over by the fence. Let's go ask them.' 
Then everything started to happen quickly. 
'New recruits?' yelled the sergeant. 'Give me your papers! Why the hell are you standing 
there next to each other! March! Left I said, not right! Trot, trot! Halt, fuck and about-face! 
Listen and remember! Go to the Master of Supplies! Collect your weapons! Chain shirt, 
tabard, pike, helmet and dagger! Then back here for drills! Be ready at sunset! Break ranks! 
Go!' 
'Wait,' Jarre said looking insecure, 'Because I think I have another assignment...' 
'WHAT?' 
'Excuse me, Officer,' Jarre blushed. 'I just want to prevent any mistake... The 
Commissioner clearly... Explicitly talked about an allocation to the PFI, so I...' 
'You're home, boy' snorted the sergeant, disarmed a bit by being called "officer". 'This is 
your assignment. Welcome to the Poor Fucking Infantry.' 
 
*** 
 
'Why,' wondered Rocco Hildebrandt, 'do we still have to pay you, gentlemen soldiers? 
We have already paid all the taxes on time.' 
'Do you hear this shrimp,' Pike said grinning to his cronies on stolen horses. 'He said he 
already paid. And they think that that was everything. It's like the turkey who was pondering 
Sunday. But had his head cut off on Saturday!' 

Okultich, Klaproth, Milton and Ograbek broke out in laughter. The joke was after all a 
front. And the fun was about to start. 
Rocco saw the disgusting, sticky eyes of the ravagers and looked around. On the 
threshold of the cottage was Incarvilia Hildebrandt, his wife and his two daughters, Aloe and 
Yasmin. 
Pike and his company looked at the halfling women, smiling lasciviously. Yes, without a 
doubt, this promised to be great fun. 
From out of a hedge on the other side of the road approached Hildebrandt's niece, 
Impatientia Vanderbeck, affectionately known as Impi. She was a truly beautiful girl. The 
bandit's smiles became even more disgusting. 
'Come,' Pike urged the halfling. 'Bring out food for us and the horses and take it to the 
barn. We do not want to be stuck here after dark. We want to visit the neighbouring villages 
today.' 
'Why do we have to pay and give you what is ours?' Rocco Hildebrandt's voice trembled 
slightly, but still remained stubborn and tenacious. 'You say it is for the army, for our 
defence. And who will protect us from hunger? We have already paid for the winter quarters 
and the contribution to the army, and the tax for each person and assessment for our lands, 
and rates and a tax on wagons and signposts and the devil knows what else! And as if this 
was not enough, four from our settlement, among them my own son, have been enlisted into 
the army. A relative of mine, Milo Vanderbeck, known as Rusty, is a field surgeon in the 
army and an important person. We have fulfilled their obligations. What are we to pay again? 
And why?' 
Pike continually watched the wife of the halfling, Incarvilia Hildebrandt of Biberveldt. 
And the plump daughters, Aloe and Yasmin. Also the cute Impi Vanderbeck, who looked like 
a doll in a green dress. At Sam Hofmeier and his grandfather, and old man Holofernes. The 
grandmother Petunia, pecking viciously at her garden bed with a hoe. At the other halflings in 
the village, mainly women and youths, looking anxiously from behind houses and fences. 
'You ask why?' Pike hissed, leading forward in his saddle, looking into the eyes of the 
frightened halfling. 'I'll tell you why. Because you are mangy halfling, a runt, a stranger. You 
are inhuman and it is the will of the gods that you are beaten and killed. Because I cannot 
wait to see this rat hole burn and see you and your bitch scurry about. Because we are five 
humans and you are a handful of cowards. Now do you know why?' 
'Now I know,' Rocco Hildebrandt said slowly. 'Get away from here, big people. Go far 
away. We will not give you anything.' 
Pike sat up and reached for the sword hanging on his saddle. 
'Strike!' he shouted. 'Kill them.' 
With a movement, faster than the eye could follow, Rocco Hildebrandt bent down to his 
wheelbarrow, took out a crossbow hidden under some mats and shot his attacker with a bolt 
right into his open mouth. Incarvilia Hildebrandt, born a Biberveldt, whipped her hands 
through the air and threw a sickle which neatly cut through Milton's larynx. The country boy 
a son of a servant began to vomit blood and flipped over the back of his horse, legs waving. 
Ograbek, emitting a scream, and fell face down under the hooves of his horse, in his belly up 
to the wooden handle was stuck grandfather Holofernes knife. The burly Klaproth started to 
club the old man, but flew out of his saddle, squealing terribly, hit straight in the eye with a 
skewer flung by Impiana Vanderbeck. Okultich wheeled his horse and tried to flee, but 
grandmother Petunia jumped up and sliced her hoe into his thigh. Okultich roared and fell, 
his foot still stuck in the stirrup, his frightened horse dragged him through hedges and over 
sharp sticks. The dragged robber roared and howled and after him raced grandmother Petunia 
with her hoe and Impiana with a crooked knife for grafting trees. Old man Holofernes blew 
his nose loudly through his fingers. 

The whole episode – from Pike screaming to grandfather Holofernes blowing his nose – 
took about as long as it would take to say – "Halflings are extremely fast and agile and can 
flawless hurl missiles of all kinds." 
Rocco sat on the steps of the cottage. Beside him sat his wife Incarvilia. Their daughters 
went to help Sam Hofmeier strip the slain and wounded. 
Impiana came back with her green dress pulled back to the elbows. Grandmother Petunia 
also came back, she walked slowly, panting and groaning and leaning on her hoe. 
Oh, our grandmother is getting older and aging, Rocco thought. 
'Where should we bury the robbers, Mister Rocco?' asked Sam Hofmeier. 
Rocco Hildebrandt took his wife in his arms and looked at the sky. 
'In the birch grove,' he said,' along with the ones who have come before them.' 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The sensational adventures of Mister Malcolm Guthrie of Braemore have achieved great 
notoriety in the pages of the largest newspapers, even the London "Daily Mail" has dedicate 
a few lines in the "Bizarre" section. Since we know that only a small number of our 
subscribers read press releases issued south of Tweed, we will recall the said event. On 
March 10th this year Mister Malcolm Guthrie went with a fishing rod to Loch Glascarnoch. 
There Mister Guthrie saw out of the mist and nothingness (sic) from the lake appeared a girl 
with a scar on her face (sic), riding a black mare (sic), accompanied by a white unicorn (sic). 
The girl approached the stunned Mister Guthrie and spoke to him in a language that Mister 
Guthrie described as, and I quote "French, I think, or a dialect of another continent." 
However, as Mister Guthrie does not speak French or any other dialect from anther 
continent, he could not talk to the girl. The girl and the unicorn disappeared, to quote Mister 
Guthrie again "Like a golden dream." 
Editor Review: The dream of Mister Guthrie was a golden colour like the colour of single 
malt whiskey, which we learned from a reliable source that he used to drink regularly and 
which fully explains the visions of white unicorns, white mice and monsters from Scottish 
lakes. But the main question we want to ask Mister Guthrie is - What were you doing with a 
fishing rod on the shores of Lock Glascarnoch four days after the ban on fishing? 
 
Inverness Weekly, March 18, 1906 


