Chapter Five 
 
 
A hot and stuffy afternoon fell on the forest, the lake's surface, until recently was dark as 
polished jade, now gleamed like gold. The reflection off of the surface from the sun was so 
blinding that Ciri had to shade her watery eyes with her hand. 
 She ran through the bushes that grew on the shore and forced Kelpie into the lake, the 
deep water reached above the knees of the mare. The water was so clear that, even from the 
height of her saddle, Ciri could see the shadow of the horse on the colourful mosaic floor, the 
seaweed and the shells. She saw a small crab moving very quickly among the pebbles. 
Kelpie whinnied. Ciri jerked the reins and moved into the shallows, but not all the way to 
the shore because it was sandy with many stones which would hinder fast travel. She directed 
the mare closer to the edge of the water, where she could run on reasonably firm gravel. She 
let the mare trot, but after a while the trot became slower. With a cry she kicked her heels into 
Kelpie's side and spurred into a gallop. Water sprayed up on all sides, flashing in the sun like 
molten silver. 
She did not slow down, even when she saw the tower in front of her. They literally flew 
through the shallow water. An ordinary horse would have certainly slowed down. But 
Kelpie's breathing was deep and regular, and her canter was still fast and lightweight. 
They ran into the courtyard in full momentum, making a great noise as the horseshoes 
struck the cobblestones, she slowed the mare sharply so that for a moment the shoes slipped 
on the cobbles. She stopped right in front of the elves that waited at the foot of the tower. 
Before their very noses. She felt satisfaction when two of the usually steady and 
dispassionate elves, recoiled involuntarily. 
'Don't be alarmed,' she snorted. 'I won't hit you! Unless I wanted to.' 
 The elves quickly recovered, smoothing their faces to calm again, their indifferent eyes 
started back at her with nonchalance. Ciri jumped, or rather flew from the saddle. In her eyes 
was a challenge. 
'Bravo,' said the blond elf with a triangular face, emerging from the shadows of an 
arcade. 'A nice performance, Loc'hlaith.' 
He had greeted her the same as when she entered the Tower of the Swallow and found 
herself in the middle of blooming spring,. But that was a long time ago and it no longer 
produced any impression on Ciri. 
'I am not the Lady of the Lake,' she protested. 'I am a prisoner here! And you are my 
jailors! Why not admit it?' 
'Please!' she threw the reins to one of the elves. 'The horse needs to be rubbed down. 
And given a cool water to drink. And take good care of her!' 
The blond elf smiled. 
'Indeed,' he said, looking at the elf leading Kelpie to the stable. 'You're an imprisoned 
here and mistreated by cruel jailors. It is visible at a glance.' 
'They get what they deserve!' she put her hands on her hips and glared into his clear 
aquamarine eyes. 'I treat them like they treat me. A prison is a prison.' 
'You astonish me, Loc'hlaith.' 
'And you treat me like a stupid kid. And you have not even introduced yourself.' 
'Sorry. My name is Crevan Espane aep Caomhan Macha. And I am an Aen Saevherne, if 
you know what that means.' 
'Yes I do,' she had no time to hide her admiration. 'A Knowing one. Elven wizards.' 

'You could call it that. For convenience, I use an alias, Avallac'h, so you can call me 
that.' 
'And who told you,' Ciri frowned, 'that I have any intention of talking to you? A 
Knowing one or not, you are my jailor, and I am...' 
'A prisoner,' he finished sarcastically. 'You already said that. Also that you are a prisoner 
that is ill-treated. The riding trips are undoubtedly forced, you wear a sword on your back 
under pressure and as punishment you have to wear those garments, which are so much more 
tasteful, newer and cleaner than the one in which you were discovered. However, despite the 
harsh conditions, you do not give up. The wrong that we have committed again you, you 
repay with rebellion. You also broke with great courage some mirrors that were true works of 
art.' 
She flushed with anger and shame. 
'Oh,' he added hastily. 'You can break what you want. They are only things – even if 
they were made by artist several hundred years ago. Will you walk with me to the lake?' 
The wind had risen and it somewhat eased her embarrassment. Additionally the tall trees 
around the tower provided shade. 
The water in the lake was a murky green colour, the abundant water lilies that adorned 
it's surface, with their yellow flowers, made it seem like a meadow. The sandpipers, 
squawking and shaking their red beaks, move quickly away at their approach. 
'That mirror...' Ciri stammered, her heels digging into the wet gravel. 'I'm sorry about 
that. I was in a rage. That was all.' 
'Oh.' 
'They were ignoring me. The elves. When I speak to them, they pretend they don't 
understand. And they speak to me on purpose so that I do not understand them. Just to 
humiliate me.' 
'You speak our language perfectly. However,' he explained calmly, 'it's still a foreign 
language to you. Besides, you are using hen llinge, and they use ellylon. The difference are 
not great, but they are there.' 
'You understand. Every word.' 
'I'm speaking to you using hen lling. It is the language the elves speak on your world.' 
'And you?' she turned away. 'From what world are you? I'm not an ignorant child. At 
night I look up at the sky. There is not a single constellation that I know. This world is not my 
own. It's not my place. I came here by accident... I want to get out. To leave.' 
She bent down and picked up a stone, and made a motion as if to throw it at the 
sandpipers on the edge of the lake. She stopped when she noticed his stare. 
'When I go riding,' she said indignantly, 'I always end up back at the lake and the tower. 
Whether I head out on either side, whether I change direction, no matter what I do, every time 
I end up at the lake and the tower. Every time. I cannot get away from this place. So it is a 
prison. It's worse than a dungeon with bars on the windows. Do you know why? Because it is 
humiliating. Ellylon or not, it angers me when they make fun of me and show their distain. 
Don't pretend that you're not laughing at me and despising me. Are you surprised when I get 
angry?' 
'I'm surprised, in fact,' his eyes widened. 'Extremely.' 
She sighed and shrugged. 
'I went into the tower over a week ago,' she said, making an effort to stay calm. 'And 
when I came out I was in a different world. You were waiting for me, sitting and playing a 
flute. You said that you were surprised that I had taken so long in coming. You addressed me 
by my name, but later you gave me that nonsense about the Lady of the Lake. After that you 
disappeared without an explanation. Leaving me in this prison. Call this what you please. I 
call it contempt and malicious wounding.' 

'It has only been eight days, Zireael.' 
'Ah,' she frowned, ' So, I've been lucky? Because it could be eight weeks? Or eight 
months? Or eight... 
She paused. 
'Much you have strayed away,' he said quietly, 'from Lara Dorren. You have lost your 
inheritance, the bond with her blood. It is not surprising that people do not understand you, or 
you them. You don't just talk differently, but think differently too – in completely different 
ways. What is eight days or eight weeks? Time is not important.' 
'I confess,' she shouted back angrily. 'I'm not a wise elf, I'm just a silly mortal. For me, 
time is important, so I count the days and even hours. And I figure it has been a lot of some 
and more of others. I do not want anything from you, I do not want you to explain why it is 
spring in these woods or why unicorns live here and I do not care why the constellations in 
the sky are not known to me. I do not care how you knew my name or how I came here. I just 
want one thing – to go home! To my world! To my people! To those who think just like me! 
In the same way!' 
'You can go back to them. After a period of time.' 
'I want it now!' she cried. 'Not after a period of time, dammit! Since time here takes 
forever! Why can I not leave now? I came here alone, by choice! So what right do you have 
holding me here?' 
'You did come alone,' he said seriously. 'But not by choice. Fate has brought you here 
and we helped a little. Long have we been awaiting you. Even by the standards of our time.' 
'I do not understand any of this.' 
'We have been waiting a long time, 'he said not paying any attention to her objection, 
'fearful of one thing – that you would not be able to get here. But you did it. You have 
confirmed your origin, your blood. And that means that here, and not among the Dh'oine is 
your place. You are the rightful daughter of Lara Dorren aep Shiadhal. 
'I am the daughter of Pavetta! I do not even know who this Lara of your is!' 
He paused. Almost imperceptibly. 
'In that case,' he reconsidered, 'It would be best if I explain who Lara is. But time is 
short, so I would prefer to use the most popular explanations along the way. But from you 
recklessness and defiance you have harassed your mare...' 
'Harassed my mare? Ha! You do not know what my mare can handle. Where are we 
going?' 
'Id you'll excuse me, I'll also tell you that along the way.' 
 
*** 
 
Ciri slowed Kelpie from her mad gallop. 
Avallac'h had not lied. There, in the open, in the grasslands and heaths from which 
protruded menhirs, worked the same force that surround Tor Zireael. No matter which 
direction she rode or how fast, and invisible magic force pulled her back in a circle. 
Kelpie snorted and Ciri patted her neck, looking calm at the bunch of elves. A moment 
ago, when Avallac'h finally told her what they wanted from her, she took off at a full gallop, 
to get away from them, leaving them as far behind as possible. To escape them and their 
arrogant and unusual request. 
But there they were back in front of her. She had rode a mile, more or less. But Avallac'h 
had not lied. There was no escape. 
The only good thing about the gallop was that it had cooled her head and soothed her 
nerves. She was calmer. But she was still shaking with anger. 
I've fall in deep, she thought. By the gods, why did I enter that tower? 

She shivered as she remembered Bonhart speeding up behind her on a lathered horse on 
the cracking ice. She controlled herself. I'm alive, she thought. So it's not the end of the fight. 
The fight only end with death, everything else is just an interruption. So they taught me at 
Kaer Morhen. 
She walked Kelpie slowly, but when she saw the mare proudly raise her head she 
encouraged her to a trot. She rode around the menhirs. The grass and heather reached to her 
stirrups. 
Soon she caught up to Avallac'h and the three elves. The Knowing one was smiling 
mysteriously and watched her with his aquamarine eyes. 
'Please Avallac'h,' she said hoarsely. 'Say it was a joke.' 
'A shadow crossed his face. 
'I'm not in the habit of making jokes like this,' he said seriously. 'I will seriously reiterate 
that we want you to bear a son, Swallow, daughter of Lara Dorren. Once you give birth to the 
child, we'll let you leave here and go back to your own world. Of course, the choice is yours. 
I imagine your wild ride will have helped you to make the decision. What is your answer?' 
'My answer is no,' Ciri replied flatly. 'Categorically, permanently, no. I'm not ready and 
that is that.' 
'I confess,' he shrugged, 'you disappointed me. But it's your decision.' 
'How can you even ask such a thing?' she said, her voice trembling. ' How can you? By 
what right?' 
He looked at her blankly. Ciri also noticed that the other elves were watching. 
'It seemed to me,' he said, 'that I already clarified the secret of your origin. It seemed to 
me that you understood me. Therefore your question surprises me. We have the right and we 
can demand, Swallow. Your father, Cregennan, took our child. You have to give one to us. 
To pay off the debt. It seems to me to be only logical and fair.' 
'My father... I do not remember my father, but he was called Duny. Not Cregennan. I 
told you that already!' 
'And I told you that a few ludicrously short human generations mean nothing to us.' 
'But I won't do it!' shouted Ciri, startling the horses. 'Do you not understand? I won't! I 
hate the idea that you would try to implant a fucking parasite in me, it makes me sick to think 
that this parasite would grow in me, that...' 
She stopped suddenly, seeing the faces of the elves. In two of them was reflected infinite 
amazement. In the third, an infinite hatred. Avallac'h intentionally coughed. 
'Let's go,' he said coldly, 'a little ahead and talk face to face. Your views, Swallow, are a 
bit too radical to proclaim in public.' 
She obeyed. They rode ahead for a time without speaking. 
'I'll escape,' Ciri broke the silence. 'You will not be able to hold me against my will. I 
escaped from the island of Thanedd, I ran away from my captors and the Nilfgaardians, I 
escaped Bonhart and the Owl. I will also escape your hands. I will find a way with sorcery.' 
'I thought,' he said, that you rely more on your friends. On Yennefer. On Geralt.' 
'You know about the?' she said. 'Well, yes. You are a Knowing one! Therefore you know 
about them because I was thinking about them. In my world, they are both in danger right 
now, in this moment. And you want to keep me here... For, at least nine months. You see, I 
have no choice. I understand that it is important for you to have a child of the Elder blood, 
but I can't. I just can't.' 
The elf rode so close that their knees touched. 
'As I said, the decision is yours. We respect that, but we must take certain steps. You 
yourself will find that there is no escape, Swallow. If you refuse to cooperate, then you will 
stay here forever and you will never see your world or friends again.' 
'This is blackmail!' 

'Conversely,' he ignored her protest. 'If you will obey our request, we can tell you that 
time for us really does mean nothing.' 
'I do not understand.' 
'Here time passes differently than there. If you help us, we will reward you. Giving you 
back the time you will lose with among us. Among the People of the Alders.' 
She was silent, staring at Kelpie's black mane. I have to think of a delaying tactic, she 
thought frantically. What did Vesemir use to say – When you are to hang, ask for a cup of 
water. You never know what is going to happen before they bring it. 
One of the elves whistled shrilly. 
Avallac'h horse whinnied and nervously stamped the ground. The elf mastered it, and 
shouted something back in elvish. Ciri saw one of the riders pull a bow from his saddle. She 
stood up in the stirrups and shadowed her eyes with her hands. 
'Stay calm.' Avallac'h said sharply. Ciri sighed. 
About two hundred feet away rushing through the heath was a herd of unicorns. At least 
thirty of them. She had seen them before, sometimes at dawn come down to the lake under 
the Tower od the Swallow to drink. But they never let her approach them – they always 
disappeared like ghosts. 
The leader of the herd was a strong stallion, a rust-red colour. He stopped and whinnied 
loudly, rearing. He stood on his hind legs with his front legs pawing at the air in a way no 
horse would be able to do. 
Ciri noticed with astonishment that Avallac'h and his elves had started to softly chant 
some strange, monotonous melody. 
Who are you? 
She shook her head. 
Who are you? The question resonated inside her head, pounding at her temples. Suddenly 
the song of the elves escalated. The unicorn whinnied and the whole herd replied. The earth 
shook as the animals ran off. 
The elves' song stopped. Ciri saw Avallac'h wiping sweat from his forehead. The elf 
looked at her out of the corner of his eye, to see if he saw it. 
'Not everything here is as nice as it seems on first sight.' He said dryly. 'Not everything.' 
'Are you afraid of unicorns? They're wise and friendly.' 
He did not answer. 
'I've heard,' she did not give up. 'that elves and unicorns love one another.' 
He turned his head. 
'Consider then,' he said coolly, 'what you saw then was an argument between lovers.' 
She asked no more questions. 
She had enough of her own concerns. 
 
*** 
 
The tops of the hills were crowned with menhirs and dolmens. The sight of them 
reminded Ciri of the stone in Ellander, where Yennefer had taught her magic. Oh, that was a 
long time ago, she thought. Centuries ago... 
One of the elves screamed. Ciri looked in the direction that the woman was pointing. 
Before she could properly realise that the herd had returned, led by the red stallion, another 
elf cried out. Ciri sat up in her saddle. 
From behind the hill, on the opposite side, emerged a second herd. The unicorn guiding 
them was a bluish grey colour. 
Avallac'h shouted a few words. They were in the Elvish dialect, ellyon, that she found 
incomprehensible, but the command seem to be for them to grab their bows. Avallac'h turned 

towards Ciri, and she felt her mind begin to hum. It was a sound quite similar to that of when 
you put your ear to a sea conch. But much stronger. 
Do not resist - she heard a voice – Do not defend yourself. I have to make a leap. I have 
to transfer us elsewhere. There is mortal danger here. 
Suddenly they heard a whistle and a shout. The rumble of shod hooves. From over the top 
of the hill galloped riders. A whole detachment. 
The hill was covered with horses, and the riders wore helmets with crests. From their 
shoulders billowed cloaks, whose vibrant red, cinnamon and amaranth colours were 
reminiscent of the refection of fire in the evening sky. 
With whistles and shouts, the riders headed towards them. 
Before they had made it half way, the unicorns had disappeared. 
 
*** 
 
The leader of the horsemen was a black-haired elf sitting on a dark brown stallion, who 
looked like a dragon – he was huge and had trappings embroidered with golden scales and 
wearing a horned bukranion. All the other elves had black hair and red jackets under their 
armour which was made of incredibly small steel rings that clung to the body like wool 
knitwear. 
'Avallac'h,' he saluted. 
 'Eredin.' 
'You owe me for the help. To be paid off when requested.' 
'I will pay when you ask.' 
The black-haired elf jumped to the ground. Avallac'h also dismounted and motioned for 
Ciri and the others to do the same. They climbed the hill between the upright stones 
surrounded by bushes and blooming myrtle. Ciri eyed her companions. Both were of the 
same stature – very tall. But Avallac'h face was modest, while the rider's commanders face 
resembled a bird of prey. Blond and black, she thought. Good and evil. Light and Dark. 
'Zireael, let me introduce to you this man – Eredin Breacc Glas.' 
'Nice to meet you.' The elf bowed. Ciri replied with a clumsy bow. 
'How did you know,' asked Avallac'h, 'that something threatened us?' 
'I didn't know,' the elf looked at Ciri intently. 'I patrol the plains, because news has 
spread that the unicorns have grown restless and aggressive. No one knows why. Now I know 
the reason. It's because of her.' 
Avallac'h did not confirm or deny. Ciri's haughty eyes meet the black-haired elf's. For a 
moment, they both looked at each other, and no one wanted to be the first to look away. 
'She has to be of the Elder Blood? The elf shook his head. 'Aen Hen Ichaer. Lara Dorren 
aep Shiadhal's legacy? This is hard to believe. She looks like an ordinary small Dh'oine, 
human female.' 
Avallac'h remained silent. His face was impassive and indifferent. 
'I assume,' Eredin continued, 'that you have made a mistake. Bah, rumour has it that you 
never make mistakes. In this creation, deeply hidden, lies Lara's gene. When you look closely 
you can see some of the characteristics. Indeed, in her eyes I find something that awakens in 
me the memory of Lara Dorren. Am I right, Avallac'h? Who else, if not you, should know?' 
Again Avallac'h remained silent. But Ciri noticed a shadow of a blush on his pale face. 
She was very surprised and that gave her pause. 
'Generally speaking,' sneered the dark-haired elf, 'I can see something in the little 
Dh'oine. I can see it and appreciate it. Like I've found a nugget of gold on a pile of manure.' 
Ciri's eyes flashed angrily. Avallac'h slowly raised his head. 
'You talk,' he said slowly, 'just like a human, Eredin.' 

Eredin Breacc Glas smiled showing his teeth. Ciri had seen such teeth – very white, very 
small, inhuman, all identical and with no canines. She had seen teeth like that in the elves 
lying dead, lined up in the courtyard of the guardhouse in Kaedwen. She had also seen such 
teeth in Sparks. But when Sparks smiled it looked nice, when Eredin did it, it looked ghastly. 
'I wonder if this girl, who is trying to pierce my eyes, knows the reason why she is here?' 
he aked. 
'Yes.' 
'And is she ready to cooperate?' 
'Not quite.' 
'Not quite,' he repeated. 'This is bad. The nature of the task requires cooperation for it to 
completely work. Unconditional. Otherwise it will not work. And because Tir Na Lia is 
barely half a day's journey away, it is worth it to know where we stand.' 
'You're too impatient,' Avallac'h curled his lips. 'What can we gain in such a hurry?' 
'Eternity,' Eredin said soberly, but his strange green eyes flashed. 'But this is your 
speciality, Avallac'h. Your speciality and your responsibility.' 
'So you've said.' 
'Yes, so I've said. And now if you'll excuse me, duty calls. I'll leave some of my men to 
escort you to safety. I'd advise spending the night here on this hill, if you leave at dawn, you 
will be in Tir Na Lia at the right time. Va Faill. Oh, one more thing...' he leaned down and 
plucked a blossoming twig of myrtle. He sniffed it and the handed it to Ciri with a bow. 
'Reconciliation,' he said shortly. 'An apology for careless words. Va Faill, luned.' 
He quickly left and soon the ground shook as the majority of his band left. 
'Don't tell me,' Ciri snarled,' that I would have to have... to have, with him... If it is, 
then never ever...' 
'No,' Avallac'h said unhurried. 'It will not be him. Calm down.' 
Ciri moved the myrtle closer to her face, so that Avallac'h would not noticed the 
excitement and fascination that enveloped her.' 
'I am calm.' 
 
*** 
 
The dry heather was replaced with lush grass, green ferns and yellow buttercups. Soon 
they saw a lazily flowing river lined with poplars. The water in the river, although clean, had 
a brownish colour. It smelled of peat. 
Avallac'h played on his flute a variety of lively tunes. Ciri rode frowning and thinking 
hard. 
'Who,' she asked, 'is to be the father of the child, for whom you care so much? Or maybe 
it does not matter?' 
'It is important. Am I to understand that you have made a decision?' 
'No, you do not understand. Just explain some things.' 
'I'm at your service. What do you want to know?' 
'You know what.' 
For a time they rode in silence. Ciri saw some swans floating down the river. 
'The father.' Avallac'h said calmly and factually, 'will be Auberon Muircetach. Auberon 
Muircetach is our... How do you say... Supreme leader?' 
'King? King of the Aen Seidhe?' 
'The Aen Seidhe, the People of the Hills, are the elves of your world. We are the Aen 
Elle, the People of the Alders. And Auberon Muircetach is, of course, our king.' 
'King of the Alders?' 
'You can call him that.' 

They rode in silence. It was very warm. 
'Avallac'h.' 
'Go ahead.' 
'If I decide, then... later... I'll be free?' 
'You will be free and you can go where you want. If you decide to stay. With the child.' 
'She snorted dismissively, but said nothing. 
'So you have decided?' he asked. 
'I'll decide when we get there.' 
'We are on the spot.' 
Through the branches of the weeping willows that hung down over the river, flowing like 
green curtains, Ciri saw a palace. She had never seen anything like it. As if it were not made 
of marble and alabaster, but of white lace – so delicate and light that it seemed ethereal, as if 
they were not buildings, but the ghosts of buildings. Ciri expected that at any moment the 
wind would blow and the palaces would disappear along with the rising river mist. But when 
the wind blew, the mist disappeared and moved the willow branches and wrinkled the river, 
but the palaces remained. Just more beautiful. 
Ciri looked raptly at the wispy hanging terraces and balconies, the bridges over the river 
which were hung with festoons of ivy, the stairs, balustrades, the arcades and cloisters, the 
columns, the domes, and the slender asparagus-like towers. 
'Tir Na Lia,' Avallac'h said quietly. 
The closer they move, the more fascinating the charm of the place became. Ciri's heart 
pounded and her throat was tight as she a passed fountains, mosaics and sculptures. Even the 
openwork structures whose use she did not understand. And so she was sure that they did not 
serve anything, they were just an addition to the aesthetics and harmony. 
'Tir Na Lia,' Avallac'h repeated. 'Have you ever seen anything like it?' 
'Yes,' she said through her tight throat. 'I saw the remains of such a thing. In 
Shaerrawedd.' 
This time the elf was silent for a long while. 
 
*** 
 
They crossed the river by a bridge, the arch looked so frail that Kelpie rebelled and 
snorted when she tried to cross. 
Ciri was tense and restless, but carefully looked around, not wanting to miss anything, 
none of the views, that the city of Tir Na Lia had to offer. Firstly, from a burning curiosity. 
Secondly, she had not stopped thinking about the possibility of escape and diligently kept 
watch for such an occasion. 
On bridges and terraces, in malls and colonnades, balconies and porches, she saw elves 
moving, with long hair, wearing tight jerkins and short layers, with fancy embroidery. Or in 
sheer flowing dresses or in tight clothes that emphasised the curves of their bodies. 
Before the porch of one of the palaces, they were met by Eredin Breacc Glas. On his 
instruction small grey-clad elves ran quickly and quietly to handle their horses. Ciri watched 
him in some surprise. Avallac'h, Eredin and all the elves that she had met so far were 
extremely tall, so that to look them in the eye she had to bend back her head. These grey 
elves were smaller than her. Some other race, she thought, a race of servants. Even in this 
fairy-tale word, someone has to work for the lazy. 
They entered the palace. Ciri sighed. She was a princess of royal blood and had been 
raised in a palace. But such marble, stucco, mosaics, stained glass, mirrors and chandeliers 
she had never seen. She felt in all that dazzling splendour, wrong, awkward, out of place., 
dusty, sweaty and tired from the trip. 

Avallac'h by contrast, did not care at all. He dusted his pants with his gloves, ignoring the 
fact that dust was settling on the mirrors. Then with a stately gesture he gave the gloves to a 
young elf who bowed before him. 
'Auberon,' he said briefly, 'is expecting us?' 
Eredin smiled. 
'Yes, you are expected. He is anxious. He has demanded that the Swallow come to him 
immediately, without a moment's delay. I have dissuaded him.' 
Avallac'h frowned. 
'Zireael,' Eredin explained, 'should appear before the king, unhurried, without pressure, 
relaxed, calm and in good spirits. To ensure a good mood, a bath, new clothes, a new 
hairstyle and makeup. Auberon can probably endure that long.' 
Ciri sighed deeply and looked carefully at the dark-haired elf. She was surprised at his 
sudden sympathy. Eredin flashed her a smile with his straight white teeth without canines. 
'The only thing that concerns me,' he said, 'our Swallow's eyes – twinkling like a hawk, 
have not stopped glancing left and right, like a ferret looking for a hole in her cage. From 
what I can see, Swallow is far from an unconditional surrender.' 
Avallac'h did not say anything. Ciri, of course, said nothing as well. 
'I'm not surprised,' Eredin continued. 'She could not be otherwise, since she is the blood 
of Lara Dorren aep Shiadhal. Listen to me very carefully, Zireael. There is no escape. You 
cannot break a Geas Garadh, a barrier of Magic.' 
The look Ciri throw his way clearly said that would have to be proven to be believed. 
'Even if by some miracle, you collapse the barrier,' Eredin was not distracted by her look, 
'you know that it would mean your doom. This world seems very beautiful. But it can also 
bring death, especially to strangers. A wound from the horn of a unicorn has no cure, not 
even magic. Know too, that you will get no help from your innate talents. Do not make any 
attempt to try and jump. If you did, know that my Dearg Ruadhri – my Red Horsemen, are 
able to cross the chasms of time and space.' 
She did not really understand what he was saying. But it puzzled her that Avallac'h 
suddenly scowled and frowned, clearly unhappy with Eredin's speech. As if Eredin had said 
too much. 
'Let's go,' he said. 'With your permission, Zireael. I am going to leave you in the hands 
of the women. You'll have to prepare quickly. First impressions are everything.' 
 
*** 
 
Her heart pounded in her chest, her temples throbbed with blood and her hands trembled. 
She mastered it by clenching her hands into fists. And calmed herself by breathing deeply. 
She relaxed her shoulders and tried to move her stiff neck. 
Once more she glanced into the big mirror. The sight was quite satisfactory. Her eyes and 
lips had been painted, after her bath her damp hair had been trimmed and combed, so that it at 
least partially obscured the scar on her face. She wore a silver shirt, open to mid-thigh, a red 
vest and a silk blouse. The neck scarf she had been given touched it off nicely. 
She adjusted the scarf and then reached under her skirt to check with amazement the 
underwear she wore. Briefs as thin as gossamer and stockings, which inexplicably stayed on 
her thighs without suspenders. 
She reached for the door handle. She hesitated, as if it was not a door handle, but a 
sleeping cobra. 
The plague, she automatically thought in Elvish, I've dealt with armed men. I can deal 
with... 
She closed her eyes and sighed. And entered the room. 

No one was inside. On the table lay a book and an old malachite carafe. On the walls 
were strange bas reliefs, draped curtains and floral tapestries. In one corner stood a statue. 
And in the other corner, a bed with a canopy. Her heart started pounding again. She 
swallowed. 
From the corner of her eye she saw movement. Not in the chamber. Out on the terrace. 
He sat there, his back to her in a half profile. 
Although she had learned that among the elves nobody looked like how she used to 
believe, Ciri was shocked. Every time they had spoken of a king, she had imagined someone 
like Ervyll of Verden, who she had been very close to becoming his daughter on one 
occasion. When thinking of the king she remembered him smelling of onions and beer, a 
smelly fat man with swollen eyes and a red nose stick out from over his beard and wielding a 
sceptre in his hand covered in brown spots and bitten nails. 
On the terrace sat quite a different king. 
He was very thin and apparently very tall. He wore a black Jacket and traditional high 
elven boots with buckles across the length of the leg. His long, grey hair, fell down over 
sloping shoulders and down his back. His hands were white and narrow, with long fingers. 
He was busy blowing bubble. He held a bowl with soap and water and a straw, into which 
he blew again and again, as iridescent rainbow bubbles floated down to the river. 
Ciri coughed softly. 
The King of the Alders turned. Ciri could not help but sigh. His eyes were extraordinary. 
Clear as molten lead and huge. And full of indescribable sadness. 
'Zireael,' he said. 'Thank you for agreeing to see me.' 
Ciri stood silently not knowing what to say. Auberon Muircetach blew into the straw 
again, and launched another bubble into the air. 
To control her trembling hands, she clasped them together and cracked her fingers, then 
nervously smoothed her hair. The elf didn't notice as all his attention was focused on the 
bubbles. 
'Are you nervous?' 
'No,' she blatantly lied. 'I'm not.' 
'Are you in a hurry?' 
'Of course.' 
She probably put too much defiance in her voice, she felt that she was teetering on the 
edge of civility. The elf gave no sign that he noticed, instead he inflated a huge bubble at the 
end of his straw. He admired his work for a long time. 
'Would I be unduly curious, if I asked where you are in such a hurry to go?' 
'Home,' she said, but then added in a gentler tone. 'To my world.' 
'To where?' 
'To my world!' 
'Ah. Sorry. I could have sworn you said – "My mule." It made me flustered. You speak 
our language perfectly, but you should pay more attention to intonation and pronunciation.' 
'Is it important to intonate? It would not if you had not brought me here to talk.' 
'Nothing hurts when aspiring to perfection.' 
From the end of the straw emerged a new bubble which detached and began to float 
through the air, before exploding on impact with a willow branch. Ciri sighed again 
'So you are in a hurry to return to your world,' said King Auberon Muiretach. 'Your 
world! You people really do not suffer from excessive modesty. Your hairy ancestors 
appeared with sword in hand latter than the chickens. And yet I have never heard a hen claim 
that it was "their world". Hwy are you fidgeting like a monkey? What I'm saying should 
interest you. After all, it is your history. Oh, let me guess – you do not care about this story 
and you're bored.' 

The breeze carried another bubble away down the river. Ciri remained silent, biting her 
lip. 
'Your hairy ancestors,' the elf continued, shaking the straw in the bowl, 'quickly learned 
to use their opposable thumb and rudimentary intelligence. With their help they did different 
things, usually as ridiculous as terrible. What I mean to say is that, if anything that your 
ancestors created was not terrible, then it was ridiculous.' 
Another bubble followed the first then another. 
'We, Aen Elle, we cared very little about the deeds of your ancestors, we unlike the Aen 
Seidhe, our cousins, we left that world a long time ago. We chose another universe, more 
interesting. In that time, it will surprise you, it was possible to move freely from one world to 
another quite easily. With some talent and practice, that is. I have no doubt that you 
understand what I mean.' 
Ciri was intrigues, but remained silent, aware that the elf was teasing. She did not want to 
facilitate the task. 
Auberon Muircetach smiled. He turned around. On his neck was a golden torc – a symbol 
of the ruler, known in the elder speech as a torc'h. 
'Mire, luned.' 
Again he blew lightly into the straw while gently swaying. A fan of smaller bubbles 
soared into the air. 
'The worlds were like these bubbles,' he hummed. 'So, it was, so it was... We told 
ourselves, what's the difference, we will stay here a little while, then there a little while, so 
what if the stupid Dh'oine insist on destroying themselves and the world? We'll go 
somewhere else, to another bubble...' 
Under his burning gaze, Ciri nodded and licked her lips. The elf smiled again, and blew 
his bubbles again, this time so that the straw formed a large cluster of smaller bubbles and 
joined to each other. 
'Then came the Conjunction,' the elf raised his straw laden with bubbles. 'The number of 
worlds increased. But the door closed. It was closed to all but a handful of elected people. 
And the clock was ticking. We needed to open the door. Urgently. It was imperative. Do you 
understand that word?' 
'I'm not stupid.' 
'No, you're not,' he turned his head again. 'You cannot be. You are Aen Hen Ichaer, the 
Elder Blood. Come.' 
He extended his hand and Ciri inadvertently clenched her teeth. But Auberon only 
touched her forearm and then her hands. She felt a pleasant tingling. She dared to look into 
his incredible eyes. 
'When I was told, I did not believe it,' he whispered. 'But it is true. Your eyes are 
Shiadhal. Lara's eyes.' 
Ciri looked down. She felt stupid and insecure. The King of the Alders rested his elbows 
on the railing and his chin in his hands. 
For a long time it seemed like her was only interesting in the swans swimming in the 
river. 
'Thanks for coming,' he said finally, without turning his head. 'Now go away and leave 
me alone.' 
 
*** 
 
She found Avallac'h on a terrace by the river, just about to board a boat in the company 
of a beautiful elf with hair the colour of straw. The elf's lips were painted a pistachio colour 
and her eyelids and temples were painted with gold. 

Ciri was about to turn around and leave when a gesture from Avallac'h restrained her. 
With another gesture he invited her onto the boat. She hesitated. She did not want to talk in 
front of witnesses. Avallac'h said a few quiet words to the elf and kissed her hand. The elf 
shrugged and walked away. Only once did she glance at Ciri and her eyes show exactly what 
she thought of her. 
'If you can, refrain from comment,' said Avallac'h as she sat on a bench in the bow. He 
sat down across from her, pulled out his flute and began to play, ignoring the boat 
completely.. Ciri watched anxiously., but the boat slid perfectly into the middle of the river, 
without deviating an inch. The boat was very strange, Ciri had never seen anything like it, 
even in Skellige where one could see everything that could move through water. It had a high 
bow carved into the shape of a key, was very narrow and very shaky. Indeed, only an elf 
could sit in something like this and play carefree on a flute, instead of rowing and steering. 
Avallac'h stopped playing. 
'What is it that troubles you?' 
He listened to Ciri's story with a vague smile. 
'You're disappointed,' he did not ask. 'Disappointed and disillusioned and above all 
outraged.' 
'Not at all! I'm not!' 
'You should not be,' the elf became serious. 'Auberon treated you with reverence, as a 
native Aen Elle. Do not forget, we, the People of the Alders, do not ever hurry. We have 
time.' 
'He told me something else.' 
'I know what he said.' 
'What he wanted, well, you know?' 
'Certainly.' 
She had learned a lot. She did not sigh nor gave a hint of impatience or irritability when 
he put the flute to his lips and started playing again. Melodic and wistful. 
The boat sailed and bridges passed overhead. 
'We have very serious reasons for believing,' he said after the fourth bridge had passed, 
'that your world is in danger of disappearing. In a natural disaster no a massive scale. You do 
have some elementary education, so you must have heard of the Aen Ithlinnespeath – the 
Ithlinne's Prophecy. She speaks of the time of the White winter. In our opinion, it will be a 
powerful ice age. It will be so extensive that it threatens the existence of most living 
creatures. They will simply die from the cold. Those who survive will fall into barbarism, 
killing each other in ruthless battles for food, they will become prey to predators mad with 
hunger. Remember the text from the prophecy – The time of contempt, the Axe and the 
Wolf's Blizzard.' 
Ciri did not interrupt him, afraid that he would start playing the flute again. 
'The child, on which so much depends,' said Avallac'h as he played with his flute, 'will 
be a descendant of Lara Dorren and a carrier of the gene, a gene that was specially built by 
us, it may save the inhabitants of your world. We have reason to think that the descenadant pf 
Lara and your child, of course, will have abilities a thousand times more powerful than those 
we have, the Knowing ones. The same as you yourself possess. Do you know what I mean?' 
Ciri had learned that in the Elder Speech such rhetorical figures, although seemingly 
questions, do not require an answer, but simply prohibit a response. 
'In short,' continued Avallac'h, 'we will have the opportunity to travel between the 
worlds, and not for only a single person. We want to open Ard Gaeth – The Great Gate, 
which all will pass through. We could do this before the Conjunction, and we will achieve it 
now. We will evacuate the dying world and the Aen Seidhe who live there, our brothers, 

whom we are obliged to help. We do not neglect such a responsibility. We will take all of the 
world's endangered, Zireael. Everyone, even the humans.' 
'Really?' Ciri couldn't contain herself. 'Even the Dh'oine?' 
'Yes. Trust me. Do you now see how important you are, how we care about you? It is 
imperative that you be patient. It is important that you return to Auberon and spend the night 
with him. Believe me, his behaviour has not been a sign of reluctance. He knows, that for you 
this is not easy and does not wish to be inappropriately hasty. He knows many things, 
Swallow. You may have no doubt noticed.' 
'Yes, I've noticed,' she snorted. 'I've also noticed that the current has bore us quite far 
from Tir Na Lia. Time to take the oars. Which, moreover, I do not see here.' 
'Because they are not here,' Avallac'h raised his arm, turned his hand and snapped his 
fingers. The boat stopped. It stood in place, then began to move against the current. 
The elf sat comfortably, put his flute to his lips and completely devoted himself to music. 
 
*** 
 
That night, the King of the Alders invited her to dinner. When she entered, accompanied 
by the rustle of silk, he motioned her to sit down at the table. There were no servants. He 
served himself. 
Dinner consisted of more than a dozen varieties of vegetables, there were also 
mushrooms, fried, stewed and dipped in sauce. Ciri had never tried that kind of mushroom. 
Some were white and thin like leaves with a delicate and delicious flavour, others were 
brown and black, aromatic and fleshy. 
The meal was washed down with rose wine, which was light and relaxed the tongue. 
Before she knew it, she had told him things that she never thought she'd tell anyone. He 
listened patiently. And then she suddenly remembered what it was she had come here to do. 
She frowned and stopped. 
'As I understand it,' Auberon said, offering her another kind of mushroom, greenish and 
smelling like apple pie, 'you are convinced that destiny binds you to this man, Geralt?' 
'That's right,' she said, picking up a glass with lipstick marks around the edges. 'Destiny. 
He, that is, Geralt, is predestined for me, and I him. Our fates are intertwined. Therefore it 
would be better if I left immediately. Do you understand?' 
'I admit, not much.' 
'Destiny,' she drank a little wine. 'The power that is not advisable to resist. So I think... 
No, no, thank you, I do not want more, I am stuffed to bursting.' 
'What do you mean?' 
'I think it is wrong for you to keep me here. And if you force me... Well, you know what 
I mean. I have to leave here, and hurry to their aid... Because my destiny...' 
'Fate,' he interrupted, raising his cup. 'Predestination. Something that is inevitable. The 
mechanism that causes a virtually infinite number of unforeseeable events to necessarily lead 
to one result and not another. Is that it?' 
'Exactly!' 
'So where and why do you want to go? Drink wine, enjoy the moment, enjoy life. What is 
to come, will come, if it is inevitable.' 
'It's not that simple.' 
'Thus contradicting yourself.' 
'That's not true.' 
'You deny the denial, that's a vicious circle.' 
'No,' she said shaking her head. 'You can't sit there and do nothing. Nothing comes by 
itself!' 

'That's a sophism.' 
'You cannot mindlessly waste time! You'll miss the right moment... There is often only 
one, unrepeatable. Time cannot go backwards.' 
'Excuse me,' he said, getting up from the table. 'Look at this.' 
He pointed to a wall, which was decorated with an embossed relief depicting a giant scaly 
snake. The reptile was rolled into the shape of a figure eight with its teeth biting its own tail. 
Ciri had seen a similar representation, but could not remember where it was. 
'Here you see the snake Uroboros,' said the elf. It is the symbol of infinity, eternal 
departure and eternal returns. It has neither beginnings nor ends. Time is like Uroboros. Time 
is the passing moments, like grains of sand in an hourglass. We try to measure acts and 
events, but Uroboros reminds us that every moment, in every deed and every event lurks in 
the past , the present and the future – in short, eternity. Every departure is also returning, 
every welcome is also a goodbye. Everything is simultaneously the beginning and the end. 
And you...' the elf said, but did not look at the girl. 'You're the beginning and the end. And 
because there was a question of destiny, know that this is your destiny. Being the beginning 
and the end. Do you understand?' 
Ciri hesitated a few seconds. But the vehement look from Auberon forced her to reply. 
'I understand.' 
'Take off your clothes,' he said it so casually and carelessly, she nearly exploded with 
anger. With trembling hands, she began to unbutton her bodice. The bodice was tight, and she 
had trouble with the hooks and buttons with her clumsy fingers. Although Ciri was in a hurry 
to get it over with, it took her a long time to take off her clothes. But the elf gave no sense of 
hurry. As if, indeed, he had all eternity. 
Who knows, she thought. Maybe he does. 
Once she was naked, she shifted from foot to foot, the ground was cold. Auberon realised 
and wordlessly, he pointed to the bed. The bedspread were mink. Extensivly formed by many 
skins sewn together. Warm, soft and comfortable. 
He lay beside her, dressed from head to toe, even with boots on. 
When he touched her, she could not help but stiffen and was angry with herself as she 
was determined to show him she was proud and distant to the end. Her teeth, needless to say, 
chattered slightly. But the elf's electrifying touch calmed her, and his fingers began to teach 
and give orders. To give directions. In time she began to assimilate so well to his indications 
she could almost anticipate them. She closed her eyes and imagined it was Mistle who was at 
her side. But it did not work because he was not at all like Mistle. 
His hand taught her what to do. She obeyed. Even happy. Hastily. 
He did not hurry. His touch was like soft silk. He made her moan. Biting her lip. He got 
her whole body to contract in a violent spasm. 
What he did then, she did not expect. 
He got up and walked away. Leaving her flushed, panting and trembling. 
He did not even look at her. 
Ciri's blood rushed to her face and forehead. She curled up on the mink bedspread. And 
began to sob in anger, shame and humiliation. 
 
*** 
 
The next morning, she sought out Avallac'h and found him at the rear of the palace. He 
walked along the row of statues that depicted, to her surprise, elven children. In various, 
mainly playful poses. Especially the one with which the elf was interested in – a little boy 
with his mouth contorted in anger, with clenched fists, standing on one leg. 

Ciri stared at it for a long time, she felt a dull pain in her stomach. Only when Avallac'h 
urged her, she told him everything. Fragmented and with frequent omissions. 
'He,' said the elf when she had finished, 'has seen the smoke from the fires of more than 
six hundred and fifty Saovines. Believe me, Swallow, that's a lot even for the People of the 
Alders.' 
'And what do I care?' she snapped. 'We have a contract! Have your relatives the dwarves 
not told you what a contract is? I fulfilled my obligations! I surrendered! What does it matter 
to me if he cannot, or will not? What do I care if he had impotence or is not attracted to me? 
Maybe he abhors Dh'oine? What if like Eredin, when he see me he see a gold nugget in a pile 
of manure?' 
'I hope,' Avallac'h face lost its usual calm and changed, 'you didn't tell him something 
like that?' 
'I did not say anything. And not for lack of desire.' 
'Be careful. You do not know what you risk.' 
'I do not care. We had an agreement and I am free.' 
'Be careful, Zireael,' repeated Avallac'h, noting the enraged expression on the statue of 
the boy's face. 'Do not behave like that here. Watch every word. Make an effort to 
understand. And if there is anything you do not understand, then do not use it as an excuse to 
act precipitously. Be patient. Remember that time is of no importance.' 
'For me it is!' 
'I told you not to behave like a stubborn child. I'll repeat – be patient with Auberon. It is 
your only chance at freedom.' 
'Really?' she shouted. 'I'm beginning to have my doubts! I'm beginning to suspect that 
you've tricked me! That you have all deceived me...' 
'I promised,' Avallac'h face was a dead as the stone of the statues, 'that you will return to 
your world. I've given my word. To doubt ones word is a very serious offence for the Aen 
Elle. To avoid you occurring such an offence, I propose that we settle this talk.' 
He went to leave, but Ciri blocked his way. He narrowed his aquamarine eyes and Ciri 
realised that she was dealing with a very dangerous elf. But it was too late to go back. 
'It is typical of an elf,' she hissed like a snake, 'to offend someone and not allow the other 
to take revenge.' 
'Be careful, Swallow!' 
'Listen to me,' she lifted her head proudly. 'You King of the Alders is unable to comply, 
to me that is more than clear. No matter if it is his problem or if I'm guilty. That is not 
important. But I want to enforce the agreement. I want to get it over with. So let someone else 
get me with child, which you care so much about.' 
'You do not know what you're talking about.' 
'And if the problem is me,' she did not change her tone or expression, 'that means you've 
made a mistake. Avallac'h. You've brought the wrong person to your world.' 
'You do not know what you mean, Zireael.' 
'If he abhors me, we'll use the method that horse breeders use. Do you know how they do 
it? They take a mare to the stallion and then blindfold it and put a donkey in front of it.' 
Avallac'h did not even deign to reply. He unceremoniously ducked and walked down the 
row of statues. 
'Or maybe you?' she screamed. 'Do you want me to give myself to you! What do you 
say? Are you not willing to make that sacrifice? But you say I have the eyes of Lara!' 
He stood beside her in two leaps, his hands shot out like snakes and closed around her 
neck like steel tongs. She realised that if he wanted to, he could choke her like a little bird. 
He released her. Then leaned over and looked into her eyes at close range. 

'Who are you,' he asked very quietly, 'to dare to so profane her name? Who are you to 
dare insult me with so miserable a pittance? Oh, I know, I can see who you are. You're the 
daughter of Lara Dorren. You are the daughter of Cregennan, you are an inconsiderable, 
arrogant, narcissistic dh'oine, a representative example of a race that knows nothing, but that 
has to ruin and destroy everything, who can defile with a touch alone and befoul with a mere 
thought. Your ancestors stole my love from me, smug and ruthlessly took her away. But you, 
are worthy to be his daughter, I will not let you take my memories of her away.' 
He turned away. Ciri overcame the resistance from her squashed larynx. 
'Avallac'h.' 
He looked at her. 
'Forgive me. I behaved stupidly and miserably. Forgive me. And, if you can, forget it.' 
He walked over to her and hugged her. 
'It's forgotten,' he said kindly. 'No more talk about the matter.' 
 
*** 
 
That night, when she appeared in the royal apartments, freshly bathed, perfumed and with 
her hair combed. Auberon sat at a table, leaning over a chess board. Wordlessly, he invited 
her to sit in front of him. 
He won in ten moves. 
The second time they played, she was white, but he won in eleven moves. 
Only then did he look up, showing his clear eyes, so unique. 
'Undress, please.' 
At least she had to acknowledge one thing – he acted with tact and never rushed. 
When, as on the previous occasion, he rose from the bed and left without saying anything, 
Ciri took it calmly and resignedly. Although she could not fall asleep until almost sunrise. 
But when the first rays of dawn lit the windows she fell asleep and had a very strange 
dream. 
 
*** 
 
Vysogota was hunched over, washing algae from his muskrat traps. In the wind they dry 
reeds rustled. 
'I feel guilty, Swallow. It was I who pushed you to the idea of this mad escapade. And I 
who pointed you the way to that cursed tower.' 
'Do not feel bad, Old Crow. If not for that tower, Bonhart would have gotten me. Here at 
least I am safe. 
'You're not safe here.' 
Vysogota straighten up. 
Behind him, Ciri could see a hill, bare and rounded, protruding from the grass like the 
bent back of a monster lurking in ambush. On the hill was a giant boulder. In addition to the 
rock, stood two figures. A woman and a girl. The wind tugged at the woman's black hair. 
On the horizon, lightning flashed. 
'Chaos stretches its hand towards you, daughter. Child of the Elder Blood. You are 
entangled in movement and change, in Destruction and Renewal. Chaos wants this power and 
it does not know if it is a tool to be used or an object in its plans. Not knowing if chance will 
make you a grain of sand in the gears of the clock of Fate. Chaos is afraid, Child Surprise. He 
wants to make you afraid, too. Therefore he sends you dreams.' 
Vysogota again hunched over and cleaned another trap. He is dead, Ciri thinks cooly. 
Does that mean that here in the afterlife, the dead are forced to clear muskrat traps? 

Vysogota straightens up. Behind him, the sky glows from the reflection of burning fires. 
Across the plains rush thousands of horsemen in red coats – Dearg Ruadhri. 
'Listen carefully, Swallow. The Elder Blood that runs through your veins confers 
immense authority. You are the Lady of Space and Time. You have a vast power. Do not let 
criminals and scoundrels snatch it and use it for their ignoble purpose. Fight back! Take it 
away from their thieving hands and wicked intentions!' 
'It is easy to say! I am trapped here by some barrier or magical bond...' 
'You're the Lady of Space and Time. Nobody can imprison you.' 
Behind Vysogota is a plateau, a rocky plain covered in the wrecks of ships. Dozens of 
wrecks. And looking back further, black, menacing, toothed battlements, rising over a 
mountain lake. 
'They'll die without your help, Swallow. Only you can save them.' 
Yennefer's lips, broken, torn, move without making a sound, shedding blood. Her violet 
eyes burn within her haggard face, her matted black hair falls around her dirty face. In a hole 
in the floor is a stinking puddle, there are rats everywhere. The walls of stone are cold. 
Chains bind her wrists and ankles... 
Yennefer's fingers are a mass of clotted blood. 
'Mother! What have they done?' 
Marble stairs led down. Three flights of stairs. 
Va'esse deireadh aep eigean... Something ends...What? 
Stairs. Below, a fire burns in braziers. Burning tapestries. 
Come on, Geralt says. Down the stairs. We have to. Yes you have to. There is no other 
way. Only those stairs. I want to see the sky. 
His lips do not move. They are bruised and stained with blood. Blood, blood 
everywhere... The stairs, covered in blood... 
'There is no other way. There isn't, Star Eyes.' 
'How? How can I help them? I am in another world? I am a prisoner! I cannot do 
anything!' 
'No one can imprison you. Everything has already been covered,' say Vysogota. ' Even 
this. Look at your feet.' 
Ciri sees with horror that she is standing in a sea of bones. Among skulls, tibias and 
bones. 
'Only you can prevent this from happening, Star Eyes.' 
Vysogota straightens up. Behind him, winter and snow. The wind blows and whistles. 
Before her, in a blizzard, on a horse is Geralt. Ciri knows it, But his head is covered in a 
fur cap and a woollen scarf covers his face. Behind him in the blizzard, loom other riders, 
their lines are blurred, so thickly bundled that it is impossible to discern what they are. 
Geralt looks straight at her. But he does not see her. Snow pours into his eyes. 
'Geralt! It's me! Here!' 
He does not see her. Cannot hear her over the howling of the storm. 
'Geraaaalt!' 
Sheep, Geralt says. It was probably just sheep. Let's go back. The riders disappear, 
melting into the falling snow. 
'Geraaaaaalt! Noooooo!' 
She woke up. 
 
*** 
 
In the morning she went straight to the stable, without breakfast. She did not want to run 
into Avallac'h, did not want to talk to him. She wanted to escape questioning, curious, 

intrusive elves and other their glances. Unlike any other matter they were clearly not 
indifferent regarding the royal bedchamber. Elves did not know how to hide their curiosity 
and Ciri had no doubt that the palace walls had ears. 
 She found Kelpie in her stall and brought up her saddle and harness. Before she could 
start saddling the mare, the little grey elves appeared two heads shorter than the Aen Elle. 
With smiles and bows they went to work. 
'Thanks you,' she said. 'I could have done it myself, but thank you. You are nice.' 
The closest elf smiled and Ciri flinched. In her smile she saw canine teeth. 
She approached her in a hurry, when Ciri almost fell down in shock. She brushed the hair 
from the servants ear. An ear that did not end in a point. 
'You're a human!' 
The servant fell to her knees on the swept floor. All the others knelt too. Bowing their 
heads. Expecting punishment. 
'I...' Ciri began, while fingering the reins. 'I...' 
She didn't know what to say. The servants were still kneeling. The horses snorted and 
stamped restlessly in the stables. 
Even outside in the saddle at a trot she could not muster any ideas. Human females. As 
maids, servants, but no matter. The main thing was that even in this world there are 
Dh'oine... 
Human, she corrected herself. I think as they do. 
She was jarred from her thoughts by Kelpie's loud whinny. She lifted her head and saw 
Eredin. He sat on his dark brown stallion, now free from his demonic combat gear. The rider, 
however, wore chainmail under his red jacket. 
The stallion screamed a hoarsely welcome, shook his head and grinned at Kelpie with 
yellow teeth. Kelpie, true to the principle that there are some issues that ventilate with the 
lords, not the servants, tries to put her teeth into the elf's thigh. 
Ciri held the reins tightly. 
'Be careful,' she warned. 'Keep your distance. My mare does not like strangers. And she 
bites.' 
'Those that bite,' he measure her with a supercilious look, 'should be curried with an iron 
brush. Until they bleed. This is the proven method for treating defiance. Not just for mares.' 
He jerked his reins so hard and violently, the horse grunted and backed away a few steps, 
from his mouth trickled foam. 
'What's with the chainmail?' the girl measured the elf in return. 'Are you going to war?' 
'On the contrary, I long for peace. You mares vices aside, does it have any virtues?' 
'What kind?' 
'Maybe speed. We'll have a race?' 
'If you want, why not,' she stood in the stirrups. 'There, in the direction of those 
cromlechs...' 
'No,' he interrupted. 'Not that way.' 
'Why not?' 
'It is forbidden ground.' 
'To everyone, of course.' 
'Not for everyone, of course. Your company, Swallow, is too valuable to us to risk that 
you'll lose it. On your initiative or at the initiative of others.' 
'On the initiative of others? You're not thinking about unicorns?' 
'I do not want to bore you with what I think. Nor be frustrated by the fact that you would 
not be able to understand my thoughts.' 
'I do not understand.' 

'I know that you do not understand. Evolution has not provided you with a sufficiently 
developed brain to understand. Listen, if you want to race, then I suggest we do so along the 
river. That way. To Porphyry Bridge, the third downstream, then to the other shore and 
further downstream to the mouth of the river. Ready?' 
'Always.' 
With a cry, the elf spurred the stallion, which took off like a hurricane, before Kelpie had 
even started, they had the advantage. But, though the earth was trembling in its wake, the 
stallion could not match Kelpie. The mare overtook him, just before reaching the bridge. The 
bridge was narrow. Eredin gave a cry and the stallion, incredibly, accelerated. Ciri 
immediately grasped what was going on. The bridge would not for anything in the world, fit 
two horses. One had to slow down. 
Ciri had no intention of slowing down. She clung to the mane and Kelpie pulled forward 
like an arrow. Ciri brushed the stirrup of the elf and flew onto the bridge. Eredin's stallion 
screamed, reared up and struck an alabaster figure, it fell from its pedestal and smashed into 
pieces. 
Ciri, giggling like a ghost, galloped across the bridge, without looking back. 
At the mouth of the river she dismounted and waited. 
He came at last, trotting, calmly, with a smile. 
'My appreciation,' he said, dismounting, 'for the mare and its rider.' 
Although proud as a peacock, she careless spat. 
'Ah! You should think about being combed with iron until you bleed.' 
'Unless you have consent,' he smiled ambiguously. 'There are mares who like strong 
caresses.' 
'Quite recently,' she looked at him defiantly, 'you likened me to a pile of manure. And 
now you're talking about caresses?' 
Eredin approached Kelpie, rubbed and patted her neck and looked surprised to see that 
the mare was dry. Kelpie abruptly withdrew her head and let out a prolonged shriek. Eredin 
turned to Ciri. If he also gives me a pat, she thought, He will regret it. 
'Come with me, please.' 
They walked along a stream, running down a steep, densely forested slopes, that led up to 
stairs made of rundown sandstone. The stairs were aged, cracked and torn by tree roots. All 
around them was forest, a primeval forest, where there were many old ash and hornbeam, 
yew trees, maples and oaks, there feet tangled in hazel bushes. It smelled of sage, nettle, wet 
stones, spring and mildew. 
Ciri walked quietly, without haste and with easy breaths. She also had her nerves under 
control. She had no idea what Eredin wanted from her, but she did not have the best feelings. 
Above the rock step, from which fell a narrow waterfall was a stone terrace. On it, shaded 
by elderberry bushes, was a gazebo wrapped in ivy. Below she could see the trees, the ribbon 
of the river and the roofs, terraces and colonnades of Tir Na Lia. 
They were silent for a while, watching the scene. 
 'Nobody told me,' Ciri was the first to break the silence, 'the name of the river.' 
'Easnadh.' 
'The Sigh? Nice. And this stream.' 
'Tuathe.' 
'Whisper. Also nice. Why did no one tell me humans lived in this world?' 
'Because that information is completely irrelevant to you. Let's go to the gazebo.' 
'What for?' 
'Let's go.' 
The first thing she noticed after entering was the wooden couch. Ciri felt her temples 
begin to throb. 

Sure, she thought, it was to be expected. I read a book in the temple about an affair, 
written by Anna Tiller. It was about an old king, the queen and the young duke from power 
hungry contenders. Eredin is ruthless, ambitious and determined. He knows that the one who 
is with the queen is the true king. A real man. He who possess the queen, possess the 
kingdom. Here, on this couch, starts a coup... 
The elf sat at a marble table, and pointed for Ciri to take a second chair. The view from 
the window seemed to be of more interest to him that she was, and he was not looking at the 
couch at all. 
'Here you will stay forever,' he said, 'my light butterfly. Until the end of your life.' 
She said nothing. She looked into his eyes intently. 
There was nothing in those eyes. 
'You will not be allowed to leave here,' he continued. 'They are unwilling to admit 
despite the prophecy and myth, you're nobody, you're nothing, only a creature without 
importance. Believe it, they will not let you go. They promised it to you, just to deceive you 
and to provide you your tractability. They never intended to make good on their promise. 
Never.' 
'Avallac'h,' she said hoarsely, 'he gave his word. Doubting an elf's word is apparently an 
insult.' 
'Avallac'h is Aen Saevherne. The Knowing ones have their own code of honour, which 
with many noble phrases conceal an old rule that the end justifies the means.' 
'I don't understand why you are telling me all this. Unless... You have something you 
want from me. You want to barter. What is it? Eredin? My freedom... For what?' 
He stared at her for a long time. And she vainly sought in his eyes some indication of a 
signal, a sign, anything. 
'Undoubtedly,' he began slowly, 'you already know little enough about Auberon. You 
certainly already noticed that he is ambitious. There are things that he'll never accept, never 
take note of. He'd sooner die.' 
Ciri was silent, biting her lip and glancing at the couch. 
'Auberon Muircetach,' said the elf, 'never uses magic or other means able to change a 
situation. But such means exist. Good, strong, guaranteed resources. Much more reliable than 
the pheromones that Avallac'h's maids blend into your perfume.' 
He quickly ran his hand over the veined marble table. When he removed his hand there 
was a bottle of grey-green jade. 
'No,' Ciri gasped. 'I will not. Absolutely not.' 
'You did not let me finish.' 
'Do not take me for a fool. I will not give him what is in this flask. I won't do those kind 
of things.' 
'You draw to hasty conclusions,' he said calmly, looking into her eyes, 'in this race, you 
are overtaking yourself. Something like that always ends in a fall. A very painful fall.' 
'I said no!' 
'Think it over. Regardless of what the bottle contains, you always come out ahead, 
Swallow.' 
'No!' 
With a quick and smooth motion, like a magician, the elf make the bottle disappear from 
the table. The he looked again at the river Easnadh, which meandered thought the trees, 
gleaming. 
'You'll die here, butterfly,' he said. 'They will not let you go. But the decision is up to 
you.' 
'I've made a covenant. For my freedom...' 

'Freedom,' he spat. 'You are still talking about freedom. What would you do if you 
finally regained it? Where would you go? Do you realise that you are on our world at the 
moment, not only in space but time. Time flows differently here that there. Those whom you 
knew as children are now elderly, those who you once knew have long since died.' 
'I do not believe it.' 
'Remember your legends. Legends about people missing and returning after a year, only 
to see the graves of their relatives covered by grass. Are you going to say that they were pure 
fantasy, things taken from stories? You are wrong. For centuries, people have been 
kidnapped, snatched by riders, by the Wild Hunt. Abducted, exploited and then thrown away 
like an empty shell once consumed. But do not expect to be that lucky, Zireael. You will die 
here, you will not see the graves of your friends.' 
'I do not believe what you say.' 
'That is your personal thing. You chose your destiny. Let's go back. I want to ask you 
something, Swallow. Would it be ok to have a meal together before going back to Tir Na 
Lia?' 
For a few heartbeats, hunger, fought fascination and anger, fear of poising and a general 
dislike. 
'I'd be happy to.' She looked down. 'Thank you for the invitation.' 
'Thank you. Let's go.' 
Upon leaving the gazebo, she looked back at the couch and thought that Anna Tiller was 
probably a fool and exalted graphomanic. 
Slowly, silently, between the smell of mint, sage and nettle, they went down the stairs. 
Down the banks of the steam, which was called Whisper. 
 
*** 
 
That night, when she entered the royal apartments, perfumed, her hair still wet after 
bathing, she found Auberon on a couch leaning over a thick book. Without words, with a 
simple gesture, he invited her to sit beside him. 
The book was richly illustrated. In fact, all that were in it were illustrations. Although Ciri 
tried to play the sophisticated lady, she felt her cheeks flush. In the temple library in Ellander 
she had seen similar works. But the book the King of the Alders had, those others could not 
compete in wealth or the variety of items, or the artistry of the imagery. 
They view it in silence for a long time. 
'Take off your clothes, please.' 
This time, he too undressed. His body was lean and boyish, almost like Giselher, 
Kayleigh or Reef, who see had often saw naked as they bathed together in rivers or lakes. 
However, the Rats radiated youth, the joy of life around them sparkling like drops of water. 
For him, the King of the Alders, throbbed cold eternity. 
He was patient. Several times it seemed that he was about to. But nothing came of it. Ciri 
was angry with herself, she thought her ignorance or inexperience was to blame. He 
recognised this and calmed her. As always effectively. And she fell asleep. 
In the morning her was not with her. 
 
*** 
 
The next night, for the first time, the King of the Alders showed signs of impatience. Ciri 
found him leaning over a table, where there was a mirror set in a frame of amber. There was a 
white powder on the mirror. 
Here we go, thought Ciri. 

With a knife, Auberon was gathering the fisstech and distributing it into two strips. He 
took a tube of silver off of the table and inhaled the drug through the nose, first by his left 
nostril, then his right. His eyes, usually bright, seemed off and turbid and filed with tears. Ciri 
immediately realised this was not the first dose. 
He made to new lines on the glass and with a gesture invited her over, passing the tube. 
What does it matter, she thought, it will be easier. 
The drug was incredibly strong. 
For a while they sat side by side on the bed and stared at the moon with watery eyes. Ciri 
sneezed. 
'Lacing night,' she said, wiping her nose with her silk sleeve. 
'Magic,' he corrected her, rubbing his eyes. 'Ensh'eass not en'leass. You have to pay 
attention to the pronunciation.' 
'I'll be careful.' 
'Take off your clothes.' 
At first it seemed that everything would be okay, that the drug had excited him the same 
way that she was excited. She came alive and took the initiative, whuile even whispering 
some indecent words. That made him react and the effect was tangible, and Ciri was sure that 
this time, surely... 
Again, it did not work. 
And then he became impatient. He got up and threw a sable fur around his shoulders. He 
stood there, turned towards the window and stared at the moon. Ciri sat up and wrapped her 
arms around her knees. She was frustrated and annoyed, but unusually vigorous. 
Undoubtedly it was the effects of the strong narcotics. 
'It's my fault,' she said. 'The scar has disfigured me. I know what you see when you look 
at me. There is not much elf in me. A gold nugget in a pile of manure...' 
He whirled. 
'You are extraordinarily modest,' he said. 'I would say, rather, a pearl in pig manure. A 
diamond on a rotting finger of a corpse. The language could devise other comparisons. 
Tomorrow I'll ask about them, little dh'oine. A human in which this is absolutely nothing 
elven.' 
He went to the table, picked up the tube and bent over the mirror. Ciri sat as if made from 
stone. She felt as if someone had spat upon her. 
'I do not come here out of love!' she snapped angrily. 'I come under blackmail and you 
know it! But I agreed to do it, for...' 
'For who?' he interrupted hotly, unlike your typical elf. 'For me? For the Aen Seidh 
trapped in your world? You stupid girl! You do it for yourself, you come here in vain trying 
to give. Because it is your only hope, your only hope of salvation. I'll tell you again – prey, 
prey fervently to your human god, idols or totems. Because if it is not me, then it will be 
Avallac'h and his laboratory. You cannot even imagine what it would mean for you to go 
there and submit to the alternative.' 
'I don't care,' Ciri said in a muffled voice, curling up on the bed. 'I agreed to everything, 
just to regain my freedom. To be able to finally rid myself of you. To leave. To my world. To 
my friends.' 
'Your friends!' he sneered. 'Here is your friend!' 
Suddenly he turned and threw the fisstech covered mirror. 
'Here is your friend,' he repeated. 'Look closely.' 
He left the room, the sable fur trailing on the ground. 
She looked into the mirror and saw only her blurred reflection. But almost immediately 
the mirror brightened and filled with smoke. And then an image. 

Yennefer hanging in an abyss, her arms raised taunt above her head. The sleeves of her 
dress are like the outstretched wings of a bird. Her hair is wavy and fish swim among it. A 
whole school of fish flicker around her. Some start to nibble at the cheeks and eyes of the 
sorceress. From Yennefer's legs a rope leads down to the bottom of a lake, trapped between 
the mud and seaweed, a large basket of stones. Above in the sky, the sun shines down on the 
face of the water. 
Yennefer's dress ripples around her like seaweed. 
The smoke obscures the surface of the mirror, stained with fisstech. 
Geralt, pale as glass, his eyes closed, is still frozen under some long icicles hanging from 
rocks, and will soon be buried by the blizzard. His white hair is now a mass of ice, a white 
frost envelops his eyebrows, eyelashes and lips. The snow will not stop falling on Geralt, it 
surrounds him covering his legs and shoulders with a soft blanket. 
The blizzard howls and whistles... 
Ciri jumped up and slammed the mirror hard against the wall. The amber frame burst and 
the glass shattered. 
She recognised these kind of vision, she remembered them and knew what they were. Her 
old dreams. 
'This is not true,' she cried. 'You hear me, Auberon! I don't believe it! It's a lie! A 
deception! It's just your anger, helpless at yourself! It's your anger...' 
She sat down on the floor and began to cry. 
 
*** 
 
She suspected that the walls of the palace had ears. The next day, she could not endure 
the looks directed at her, she felt like they were laughing at her back. Avallac'h was nowhere 
to be found. 
He knows, she thought, what happened and is trying to avoid me. Before I got up, he 
probably got far away, by land or by river, with his gold makeup elf. He doesn't want to talk 
to me, doesn't want to recognise that all of his plans have collapsed. 
She could also not find Eredin. But that was quite normal – he was often out of the city 
accompanied by his Dearg Ruadhri, his Red Riders. 
Ciri went and got Kelpie from the stables and went across the river. She was deep in 
thought and took no notice to anything around her. 
I have to escape. It does not matter if those visions were true or false. On things is certain 
– Yennefer and Geralt are far away in my world and my place is with them. I have to get 
away, get out of here as quickly as possible. There must be some possibility. The same way I 
got here, O have to get myself out of here. Eredin suggested that I have a wild talent and 
Vysogota thought the same thing. I examined every corner of Tor Zireael, I found no portal, 
no exit. But maybe there is another tower somewhere... 
She looked to the horizon and saw a remote hill, on whose summit towered against the 
sky, silhouettes of cromlechs. A forbidden area, she thought. Ha, I can see that it is too far. 
The barrier will probably not let me get there. It would be pointless exertion. I'd rather head 
up the river, I've never been there... 
Kelpie snorted, shook her head and stamped her feet. She did not turn around, instead she 
started trotting towards the hill. Ciri was stunned for a moment to the point that she did not 
respond and let the mare run. Only after a while did she shout and pull on the reins. The 
result was that Kelpie reared, kicked and galloped onwards. Still in the same direction. 
Ciri did not try and stop her, or try and control her. She was amazed. She knew Kelpie 
very well. The mare had quirks, but not like this. This behaviour must mean something. 

Kelpie slowed to a trot. She wentt up the side of the hill crowned with the cromlechs. A 
league or so, Ciri thought. The magic barrier will start to work soon. 
The mare walked into the circle of stones, formed by a series of monoliths, fallen and 
mosses, very close together, which arose thought the brambles and suddenly sank into the 
ground. She did not move a muscle, except her ears, which stretched to hear better. 
Ciri tried to turn her around and move. But it was in vain. If it wasn't from her neck veins 
throbbing hot, she would have sworn she was sitting on a statue of a horse. 
Suddenly, she felt something on her shoulders, something sharp that went through her 
clothes and prodded her, hurting. Something was behind her. Emerging from behind some 
rocks, making no noise, appeared a unicorn with a red coat, with precise movements it thrust 
its horn under her armpit. Hard. Sharply. She felt blood trickle from her side. 
From the other side emerged another unicorn. This one was completely white, from the 
tips of its ears to the end of its tail. Only his nostrils were pink and his eyes black. He 
approached her from the side, slowly, and very carefully put his head in her lap. The 
excitement was so strong that Ciri moaned. 
I've grown up, a voice echoed in her head. I've grown up, Star Eyes. Then in the desert, I 
did not know how to behave. Now I know. 
'Little horse?' she moaned, almost hanging from the two hors that were clicking together. 
My name is Ihuarraquax. Do you remember me, Star Eyes? Do you remember how you 
healed me? How you saved me? 
He stepped back and turned around. Ciri could see a trace of a scar on his leg. She 
recognised him. She remembered him,. 
'Little horse! It is you! But you had a different coat... You've grown up.' 
Suddenly then was confusion in her head, whispers, voices, shouts and whinnies. The 
horns drew back. She saw that the other unicorn behind her back coat was blue. 
The older ones are learning from you, Star eyes. Through me, they are learning from you. 
A little more and they'll be able to speak for themselves. Soon they will tell you what they 
expect from you. 
The cacophony in Ciri's head exploded in an indescribable riot. But soon it relented, and 
began to flow like a stream of thoughts, clear and understandable. 
We want to help you escape, Star Eyes. 
She was silent, but her heart pounded in her chest. 
Where is the crazy joy? Where is the thanks? 
'Where,' she asked aggressively, 'does this sudden urge to help me come from? Perhaps I 
failed to win your love?' 
You have our love. But this is not your world. There is no place for you here. 
She clenched her teeth. Although encouraged by the sudden hope, she shook her head 
dismissively. Little horse – Ihuarraquax – ears pricked up, stamped his hooves and stared at 
her with his black eyes. The red unicorn stamped until the earth trembled and shook 
menacingly. He snorted angrily and Ciri understood. 
You do not trust us. 
'I do not trust you,' she said coldly. 'Everyone here plays their game and I, who don't 
know the rules, am being used. Why should I believe you now? Between you and the elves 
apparently there is no friendship, I saw it there, in the wilderness, and there was almost a 
fight. I can safely assume that you want to use me to annoy the elves. I also do not like them, 
they imprisoned me and forced me to do something that I did not want. But I will not let you 
use me.' 
Red shook his head, his horn again made a dangerous move. Blue whinnied. Ciri's skull 
thudded and picked up their thoughts which were ominous. 

'Oh, she said. 'You're just like them. Be obedient and show humility, or violence and 
death! I'm not afraid. I will not be used!' 
She felt chaos and confusion in her head. It lasted for a while, until from the chaos 
emerged legible thoughts. 
That's fine, Star Eyes, you do not like being used. That is precisely our idea. What we 
want, no more no less, is to guarantee that. For you and for ourselves. And the entire world. 
In all worlds. 
'I don't understand.' 
You're a dangerous weapon, a threat. We cannot let that weapon fall into the hands of the 
King of the Alders, the Fox and Sparrowhawk. 
'Who?' she said 'Oh...' 
The King of the Alders is an elder. But the Fox and Sparrowhawk cannot gain mastery 
over the Ard Gaeth, the Gate of Worlds. Once they had it. And then lost it. Now all they can 
do is wander between the worlds as impotent ghosts. The Fox has reached Tir Na Bea 
Arainne, and Sparrowhawk and his riders can get to the Sprial. They do not have the strength 
to go anywhere else. That's why they dream of Ard Gaeth and power.We can show you how 
to use that power. I'll show you, Star Eyes, when you leave here. 
'I can't escape from here. I can't get past the magic barrier – Geas Garadh.' 
You cannot be imprisoned. You are the Lady of the Worlds. 
'No. I have no special talent, I have no control over anything. And I renounced my 
powers a year ago, back in the desert. Little horse witnessed it.' 
In the desert you gave up only insignificant quackery. The power that is in your blood, 
you cannot give up. It is with you all the time. We well teach you how to use it. 
'And it is not by chance, she cried, 'that this power that gives dominion over worlds, you 
want me to give to you?' 
Not so. We do not need to gain this power. For we have had it forever. 
Trust them, Ihuarraquax requested. Trust them, Star Eyes. 
'On one condition.' 
The Red unicorn abruptly raised his head, opened his nostrils and she could swear his 
eyes threw sparks. They will not like it, Ciri thought, when I give them the condition, they do 
not even like the sound of the word. The Plague, I do not know what I'm doing... I hope this 
doesn't end in tragedy...' 
We are listening. What is this condition? 
'Ihuarraquax will come with me.' 
 
*** 
 
That evening the sky became cloudy and it became muggy, from the river rose a thick, 
stick mist. When it became dark, from afar came muffled thunder and lightning lit up the 
horizon. 
Ciri had long been prepared. Dressed in black riding clothes, with her sword on her back, 
tense and impatient, waiting for the coming of night. When it came, she silently walked 
through deserted halls and stealthily took arcades and descended terraces. The willow rustled 
down by the River Easnadh. 
In the sky distant thunder rolled. 
Ciri got Kelpie from the stables. The mare knew what was expected of her and obediently 
trotted towards Porphyry Bridge. Ciri stared for a moment behind her, looking at the terrace 
where the boats were moored. 
I can't, she thought. I have to see him again. Maybe it will succeed in delaying pursuit. 
It's risky, But it cannot be helped. 

At first, she thought he was not there, that the royal apartments were empty, the silence 
and stillness were absolute. 
After a moment, she saw him. He was in a corner, sitting on a couch, with a white shirt 
that exposed his narrow shoulders. The fabric was so delicate that if clung to his body as if 
wet. The face and hands of the King of the Alders were almost as white as his shirt. 
He looked up at her, those eyes were empty. 
'Shiadhal?' she whispered. 'Thank goodness you're here. You know, they have been 
saying that you're dead.' 
He opened his hand and something fell to the carpet. It was the grey-green bottle. 
'Lara,' the King of the Alders shook his head and touched his neck as if the golden royal 
torc'h was choking him. 'Caemm a me, Luned. Come to me daughter. Caemm a me, elaine.' 
His breath smelled of death. 
'Elaine blath, fainne wedd...' he crooned. 'Look, luned, you have untied your ribbon... 
Let me...' 
He tried to raise his hand, but he failed. He sighed deeply, raised his hand abruptyly and 
looked into her eyes. This time they were alive. 
'Zireael,' he said, 'Lod'hlaith, you are destined to be the Lady of the Lake, and mine as it 
turns out.' 
'Va'esse deireadh aep eigean...' he said after a moment and Ciri in horror realised that 
his movements and words had begun to slow. 
'But,' he added with a sigh, 'it is a good thing that, something also begins.' 
Through the window cane the lengthy sound of thunder. The storm was still far away. 
But it was fast approaching. 
'Yet,' spoke the king, 'I have no desire to die, Zireael. And I find it terribly sad that it has 
to happen. Who would have thought. I thought that I would have no regrets. I have live a long 
time, I have known everything. I'm bored of it all... However, now I fell regret. And do you 
want to know something else? Come closer, I whisper it. Let it be our secret.' 
Ciri leaned forward. 
'I'm afraid,' he whispered. 
'I know.' 
'Are you with me?' 
'I am.' 
'Va Faill, Luned.' 
'Goodbye, King of the Alders/' 
She sat beside him, still holding his hand after his breathing hushed and ceased. She did 
not wipe away her tears. She let them flow. 
The storm was approaching. On the horizon lightning burned. 
 
*** 
 
She ran down the marble staircase to the pier at which the boats bobbed. She untied one 
of them which she had set her eye on that evening. She left the pier, pushing off with a 
mahogany pole that had previously been used to hang curtains. She doubted the fact that the 
boat would obey her commands like it did Avallac'h. 
The boat glided silently downstream. Tir Na Lia was dark and quiet. Only the status on 
the terraces gazed at her with dead eyes. Ciri was counting bridges. 
 The sky above lit up with a flash of lightning. After a second, thundered rumbled across 
the sky. 
The third bridge. 

Something flashed across the bridge, quiet, agile, like a big black rat. It rocked the boat 
when it jumped into the bow. Ciri dropped the pole and drew her sword. 
'I see,' hissed Eredin Breacc Glas, 'you want to deprive us of your company?' 
He also drew his sword. During a brief lightning flash she was able to see the weapon. 
The blade was single-edged, slightly curved, with polished finish and uniformly sharp. The 
hilt was long and the hand-guard was a circular plate. She could see right away that the elf 
knew how to use the sword. 
Unexpectedly, he rocked the boat, stomping on the side. Ciri deftly balanced by tilting her 
boat with the movements of the boat, and in turn used the same trick when he jumped with 
both feet on the opposite side. He did not lose his balance either. 
He attacked. She parried his lunged rather instinctively, because in the dark she could 
barely see. She returned his attack with a quick bottom cut. Eredin parried and struck out 
again, Ciri deflected the blow. From the blades, sparks flew. 
Again he rocked the boat. Ciri spread her arms and balanced on the bench. He stepped 
towards the bow and lowered his sword. 
'Where did you learn all this, Swallow?' 
'You'd be surprised.' 
'I doubt it. The river can overcome the barrier. Did you figure this out yourself or did 
someone advise you?' 
'I doesn't matter.' 
'Yes it does. And we'll find out. We have our ways. But now, drop the sword and return.' 
'Never.' 
'We are going back, Zireael. Auberon is waiting. I guarantee that tonight he will be full of 
desires and requests.' 
'I doubt it,' she said. 'He overdosed on the stimulant you gave him. Or was it meant to do 
something else entirely?' 
'What are you talking about?' 
'He's dead.' 
He quickly shook of his surprise and lunged at her, rocking the boat. She balanced and 
exchanged a few angry cuts, the water carried the sound of the vibrant clash of steel on steel. 
Lightning lit up the night. Another bridge passed overhead. 
One of the last of Tir Na Lia's bridges. Or is it the last? 
'Surely you realise, Swallow,' he said hoarsely, 'that you are only delaying the inevitable. 
I cannot let you leave.' 
'Why? Auberon is dead. And I'm nobody and of no importance. It was you who told me 
that.' 
'Because that is the truth,' he said raising his sword. 'You mean nothing. You are a tiny 
moth, which I can crush between my two fingers into silver powder. But if left alone, you can 
do irreparable damage to the most precious fabric. You are nothing. Nothing but annoying.' 
Lightning flashed again. In the light Ciri could see what she wanted to see. The elf had 
his sword raised and waving, pointing to the back of the boat. He had the height advantage. 
She had to win the next attack. 
'You dared to take up arms against me, Zireael. It's too late to regret or forgive something 
like that. I will not kill you. But a few weeks in bed with bandages will do you good.' 
'Hold on. I want to say something else. I want to reveal a secret.' 
'What do you have to tell me?' he laughed. 'What pathetic secret?' 
'This, that you will not fit under this bridge.' 
Without any time to react, he hit the bottom of the bridge, and flew forward, losing his 
balance completely. Ciri could simply throw him out of the boat, however, that was not 

enough and she was afraid that he would continue his pursuit. Moreover, he intentionally or 
by negligence killed the King of the Alders. And he had to feel pain. 
She stabbed him in the thigh, just below the chainmail. He did not even scream. He 
jumped overboard into the river and the waters closed over him. 
She turned back to see what was going to happen. It took a long time before he floated to 
the top. In a flash of lightning she watched him made his way to the shore and remain lying in 
the mud and blood. 
'A few weeks in bed in bandages,' she muttered, 'will do you good.' 
She grabbed the pole and pushed hard. The Easnadh river was getting more rough, the 
boat ran faster. Soon she left the last of the buildings of Tir Na Lia behind. 
She did not look back. 
At first it was very dark, the boat sailed through the old forest, the trees and branches 
touched together above the river, creating a tunnel. Then it began to brighten. The forest 
ended and on both sides were alders, reeds and cattails. In the clear river appeared clusters of 
aquatic plants, drifting on the current. When the lightning flashed, she noticed circles on the 
water, and before the thunder drowned out all sound, she heard the splashing of startled fish. 
Several times, not far from the boat, she saw big phosphorescent eyes, and the boat repeated 
collided with something big and alive. 
Everything in this world seems beautiful, but to strangers it means death, she silently 
repeated Eredin's words. 
The river widened and islands and channels began to appear. She allowed the boat to sail 
on luck, along with the current. But she began to be afraid. What happens If I make a mistake 
or flow the wrong branch? 
While she thought, she heard a whinny from Kelpie and hear an intense mental signal 
from the unicorn. 
'There you are, Little horse!' 
We must hurry, Star Eyes. Follow me. 
'To my world?' 
First I have to show you something. I was ordered to by the elders. 
They rode firstly through the forest steppe, then through densely chopped ravines and 
gorges. Lightning flashed and thunder boomed. The storm was getting closer and the wind 
raged. 
The unicorn led Ciri to one of the gorges. 
It is here. 
'What is here?' 
Go down and see. 
She obeyed. The ground was uneven and she stumbled. There was a click and something 
rolled under her feet. There was a flash and Ciri gasped. She was in the middle of a sea of 
bones. 
The had been a landslide probably because of the intensity of the downpours. And it had 
revealed what it had been hiding. A graveyard. A large mass grave. A huge pile of bones. 
Tibiae, pelvis, ribs, femurs. Skulls. 
Ciri picked one up. 
Again the lightning flashed and she screamed. She knew whose bones were lying here. 
The skull which had been cleaved by a sharp blade had canines. 
Now you know. Now you understand. They did this, the Aen Elle, the King of the Alders, 
the Fox and Sparrowhawk. This world was not originally their world. They made it theirs 
when they conquered it. When they opened the Ard Gaeth. With our help, because we had 
been used and abused and now they are trying to use and abuse you. 
Ciri threw the skull. 

'Rogues,' she cried into the night. 'Murderers!' 
Thunder rumbled. Ihuarraquax snorted, loudly, warningly. She understood. With a single 
jump she was in the saddle and spurred Kelpie to a gallop. 
Following in their footsteps were pursuers. 
 
*** 
 
This is not the first time this has happened, she thought, feeling the wind in her face as 
she galloped. Not the first time. This wild ride in the dark, in the middle of the night, chased 
by ghosts, spectres and apparitions. 
 'Forward, Kelpie!' 
In the glow of the lightning, Ciri could see through her watering eyes willows and alders 
along the trails. But these were not trees. They were hunched monsters coming at her from 
both sides, with their twisted and gnarled limbs, rotten laughter coming from a black mouth 
cavity. Kelpie neighed shrilly and ran so fast it looked like her hooves did not touch the 
ground. 
Ciri laid flat on the back of her neck. Not only to reduce air resistance, but also in order to 
avoid the alder branches that wanted to knock her off or pull her from the saddle. The 
branches whipped and beat her, catching at her clothing and hair. The twisted trunks shook 
and the cavities snickered. 
Kelpie neighed wildly. The unicorn responded. He was a bright white spot in the dark, 
showing her the way. 
Ride, Star Eyes! Ride as fast as possible! 
It became more and more difficult to dodge the alder's branches. Very soon they blocked 
the way. 
Behind them they heard shouting. It was the voices of their pursuers. 
Ihuarraquax neighed. Ciri received his signal. Understood the importance. She adhered 
herself to Kelpie's neck. She did not need to encourage her, the frightened mare ran at a 
breakneck gallop. And other signal from the unicorn roughly broke into Ciri's mind. A 
council or rather an order. 
Jump, Star Eyes. You have to jump. To another place, another time. 
Ciri did not understand, but struggled too. She made every effort to understand. She 
concentrated. Concentrated while whispers and blood pounded in her ears... 
Lightning flashed. And then, suddenly it was dark, soft, black darkness, without a single 
beam of light. 
Her head ached and there was a buzzing in her ears. 
 
*** 
 
She felt a cool breeze on her face. Drops of rain. The smell of pine. Kelpie snorted and 
puffed. She was wet and hot. Ciri could see Ihuarraquax. He stood shaking his head and his 
horn. Pawing at the ground with his hooves. 
'Little horse?' 
I'm here, Star Eyes. 
The sky was full of stars. Full of constellations. The Dragon. Lady Winter. The Seven 
Goats. And low on the horizon – the Eye. 
'It worked,' she sighed. 'We have succeeded, Little horse. This is my world!' 
His tone was so clear that Ciri understood everything. 
No, Star Eyes. We escaped from them. But this is still not the right place, or the right 
time. You still have a long way to go. 

'Don't leave me alone.' 
I will not leave. I owe you a debt. And I will repay it. Until the end. 
 
*** 
 
The wind picked up and the clouds were swept to the west and gradually enveloped the 
constellations. The Dragon disappeared and after the Lady Winter and the Seven Goats. The 
brightest and longest glowing was the Eye. Ultimately, however, it also was covered. On the 
horizon lightning flashed briefly followed by the sound of thunder. The wind picked up dust. 
The storm was once again catching up. 
The unicorn whinnied and sent another mental signal. 
We must not waste time. Our only hope is a quick getaway. To the right place and thr 
right time. Hurry, Star Eyes. 
I am the Lady of the Worlds. I am of the Elder Blood. The blood of Lara Dorren, 
daughter of Shiadhal. 
Ihuarraquax neighed again, prompting her to hurry. Kelpie replied. Ciri pulled on her 
gloves. 
'I'm ready.' 
There was a roar in her ears. A flash. Then darkness. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

The majority of historians tend to award the process, conviction and execution of 
Joachim de Wett to the violent, cruel and tyrannical nature of Emperor Emhyr. Especially 
some works, whose authors have a fondness for literature about revenge and personal 
reckoning. The time has come to tell the truth, a truth that for a thorough researcher is 
obvious. The Duke de Wett commanded the Verden Operations Group to which the word 
"ineffective" is extraordinarily delicate. Although having been arrayed against forces with at 
least twice their numbers, separated from the offensive in the north, he directed all of their 
activities to fighting the Verden guerrillas. The Verden Operations Group committed unheard 
of atrocities against civilians. The results were easy to foresee and inexcusable – in the 
winter the insurgent forces were calculated at about five hundred armed men, by the spring it 
was almost the entire country. King Ervyll, an imperial ally, was murdered and the uprising 
was led by his son, Prince Kistrin, a northerner sympathizer. Flanked by the pirate's ships of 
Skellige, in front from the Nordlings of Cidaris and from behind by the rebellion, de Wett 
engaged in chaotic battles, suffering defeat after defeat. Thus the offensive for the Center 
Army Group was delayed. Instead of Verden being bound to the west flank of the armies 
"Center" to enable Menno Coehoorn's forces quick action, they in fact slowed down their 
campaign. So there was a delay and disruption of the offensive strategic plan. The 
Northerner immediately took advantage of the situation and went on the counterattack, 
undoing the siege around Mayena and Maribor, destroying the chances of a rapid 
reoccupation of these important strengths. 
The inefficiency and stupidity of de Wett also had a psychological importance. The myth 
of the invincibility of Nilfgaard vanished. The army of the northerners began to receive 
hundreds of volunteers... 
 
Restif de Montholon 
The Northern Wars: Myths, Lies and Propaganda 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

