Chapter Eleven 
 
 
They galloped at breakneck speeds like madmen. They rode through vibrant spring days. 
The horses were flying, and people who were toiling, straightened their bent necks and backs 
and could not believe their eyes – did they just see riders or ghosts? 
 They galloped at night, in the dark, damp nights and through the warm rain. People 
awoke in bed and looked around terrified, fighting against the pain that grew in them, in their 
throats and chests. They jumped out of bed at the sound of the pounding of the shutters, the 
crying of the children and the howls of the dogs. They peered through the windows, not 
believing their eyes – were these riders or ghosts? 
In Ebbing stories began to circulate about the three demons. 
 
*** 
 
The trio of riders appeared suddenly, out of nowhere, as if by magic, catching by surprise 
The Lame, who had no opportunity to escape. Neither did he have time to turn for help. More 
than five hundred paces separated the cripple from the first row of house of the village. Even 
if it were closer, the cripple would receive no help from the residents of Jealousy. It was 
siesta time, which in this sleepy hamlet usually lasted from late morning to early evening. 
Aristotle Bobeck, nicknamed the Lame, a local beggar and philosopher knew that during 
siesta time the villagers would not respond anything. 
The riders were three. Two women and a man. The man had white hair and a sword lying 
across his back. One of the women was dressed in black and white and had inky black, curly 
hair. The youngest, had ashen hair and a disfiguring scar on her cheek. She rode a beautiful 
black mare. The Lame had a sense of seeing the horse before. 
The youngest girl spoke first. 
'Are you from here?' 
'I did nothing,' said the Lame, his teeth chattering. 'I collect morels here. Have pity, do 
not hurt a cripple.' 
'Are you from here?' she repeated, her green eyes flashing with warning. 
The Lame started to cringe. 
'Yes, my lady,' he said. 'I come from here, from Brika. I mean, Jealousy. I was born here 
and here I will surely die...' 
'Were you here last summer and fall?' 
'Where else would I be?' 
'Do not answer me with questions!' 
'I was here, my lady.' 
The black mare shook its head and pricked up its ears. The cripple felt the glares from the 
white haired and the black haired woman sting like thorns. He feared the white haired man 
the most. 
'Last year,' the girl with the scar told the cripple, 'in September, more specifically 
September ninth, during the first quarter of the moon, six young people were murdered here. 
Four boys... And two girls. Do you remember this?' 
The Lame swallowed. He suspected for some time, now he was sure. 
The girl had changed. It was not just the scar on her face. She was not the same now as 
she was back then when she was tied to the pole and Bonhart forced her to watch as he cut 
the heads off of the Rats. Not the same as when she was forced to undress in the Chimera's 
Head Inn and the Bounty Hunter beat her. Those eyes... Those eyes had changed. 

'Speak!' snapped the woman with the black hair. 'Tell us what we ask!' 
'I remember, my lady,' said the Lame. 'I remember the six kids being killed. Last year it 
was. In September.' 
The girl was silent for a while. Not looking at him but at some point in the distance, 
above his shoulder. 
'So, you most likely know...' she said at last, with effort, 'where the young ones where 
buried. At the bottom of which stockade... under which dumpster or what dunghill... Or if the 
bodies were burned... If they were taken to the forest and left for the foxes and wolves... Take 
me there. Do you understand?' 
'I understand, my lady. Follow me, it is a short walk.' 
He limped forward and felt the hot breath of the horses on the nape of his neck. He never 
looked up. Something told him that he should not. 
'Here we are,' he pointed after a while. 'This is our village cemetery. And here are the 
ones that you asked about, Lady Falka.' 
She took a deep breath. The Lame look at her to see the expression on her face. Black-
hair and white-hair were silent, their faces like stone. She stared at the long low mound of the 
common grave, neat, tidy and topped with sandstone slabs. The spruce that had adorned the 
mound was discoloured and the flowers that someone had placed here long ago were now dry 
and yellowish. 
The girl jumped down from her horse. 
'Who?' the girl asked quietly, still staring at the mound. 
'Well,' the Lame cleared his throat, 'a lot of the locals from Jealousy contributed. But 
mostly it was the widow Goulue and young Nycklar. The widow has always been a good and 
kind woman. And Nycklar... he was haunted by terrible dreams. Until he gave the dead a 
proper burial.' 
'Where can I find the widow and Nycklar?' 
The Lame was silent for a long moment. 
'The widow is here buried behind that twisted birch,' he said finally, looking fearlessly 
into the green eyes of the girl. 'She was taken by pneumonia this winter. And Nycklar was 
drafted into the army. We heard that he supposedly died in the war.' 
'I had forgotten,' she whispered. 'Forgotten that their fate had been linked to mine.' 
She approached the mound and knelt, or rather fell to the ground. She bent low, almost 
touching her face to the sandstone slabs. The Lame noticed that the white haired man made a 
motion as if to dismount, but the dark-haired lady caught him by the arm and held him with a 
gesture and a gaze. 
The horses snorted, tossing their heads and rattling their bridles. 
For a long time the girl knelt over the graves, he lips moving in a silent litany. She rose, 
faltered. The Lame inadvertently caught her elbow. She started strongly, and yanked her arm 
away. She looked at him angrily through her tears. But did not say a word. She even nodded 
with thanks when he held her stirrup. 
'Well, my lady Falka,' he dared. 'The strange wheel of destiny is turning. You were at 
that time in a dreadful position. Few of us here in Jealousy thought that you'd escape with 
your life. And here you are today, alive and well, while Goulue and Nycklar are in the other 
world. Who can you express your gratitude to for the grave...' 
'My name is not Falka,' she said sharply. 'My name is Ciri. And in regards to my 
gratitude...' 
'You can feel honoured because of her,' the dark-haired one spoke chillingly, making the 
Lame shiver. 'For her grace, for humanity has come to you all, to your entire village, and that 
is your reward. And you do not know how big that is.' 
 

*** 
 
On the ninth of April, shortly after midnight, the first inhabitants of Claremont awakened 
to a bright red glow flickering through the widows of their homes. The rest of the inhabitants 
of the town rushed out of bed to screaming, a commotion and the ringing of an alarm bell. 
Only one of the buildings were on fire. A large wooden building of the former temple, 
once dedicated to a deity, whose name was not even remembered by the oldest of old women. 
The temple, had now converted into a amphitheatre, which occasionally held circus 
spectacles, fighting and other diversions used to pull the Claremont villagers out of boredom, 
melancholy and lethargy. 
The amphitheatre was now in flames and shaking with explosions. From all the windows 
shot tongues of flames. 
'Put it out! Roared the owner of the amphitheatre, a merchant named Houvenaghel, 
running about and waving his hands, his powerful paunch shaking. He was in a nightcap and 
a heavy fur-lined coat which he had thrown on over his dressing gown. He ran barefoot 
through the mud in the streets. 
'Put it out! Men! Get water!' 
'This is the punishment of the gods,' said one old lady. 'For the grievances that took place 
in their former abode.' 
'Aye, aunt. It certainly is.' 
From the burning building radiated heat which evaporated puddles of stinking horse 
urine, with hissing sparks. Suddenly a wind sprang up. 
'Put it out! Houvenaghel screamed wildly, seeing the fire spread to the brewery and 
granary. 'Men! Get buckets for the water!' 
There was no shortage of volunteers. Claremont even had its own fire department, 
equipped and maintained by Houvenaghel. They did everything in their power to put out the 
fire. But it was useless. 
'We cannot handle it,' the fire brigade commander groaned, rubbing his soot smeared 
face. 'This is no ordinary fire... It is a fire from hell.' 
'Black magic...' coughed another fireman. 
From the burning building they head an ominous creaking and the sound of rafters and 
beams cracking. There was a thunderous rumble and sparks and flames shot high into the sky. 
The roof broke and fell into the arena. The whole building bent as if bowing to an audience. 
Then the walls collapsed. 
With effort the fire-fighters and volunteers managed to save part of the granary and about 
a quarter of the brewery. 
Dawn came smelly and pungent. 
Houvenaghel sat in the mud and ashes, his nightcap and gown sooty and dirty. He cried 
bitterly, pouting like a child. Naturally he had insured the theatre, the brewery and the 
granary. The problem was that the insurance company was owned by Houvenaghel. Nothing, 
not even tax fraud, could compensate for his losses. 
 
*** 
 
'Now where?' Geralt asked, looking at the column of smoke that clouded the rosy 
morning sky. 'Where else do you want to visit, Ciri?' 
She looked at him and he soon regretted asking. Suddenly he wanted to hug her, he 
dreamed of holding her in his arms, cuddling her and caressing her hair. To protect her. And 
never allow her to be alone. To not suffer any more evil. And that nothing would happen to 
her that would make him crave revenge. 

Yennefer was silent. Yennefer was often silent lately. 
'Now,' Ciri said quietly, 'we go to a village call Unicorn. The name comes from the straw 
unicorn that protects the town. A poor and ridiculous puppet. I would like that, as a reminder 
of what happened there, the inhabitants have... if not valuable, at least a more dignified idol. I 
would like to ask for your help, Yennefer, because without magic...' 
'Sure, Ciri. What next?' 
'The Pereplut Swamps. I am confident that I will be able to... find a cabin in the middle of 
the swamp. I will find the remains of a man. I want those remains to rest in a decent tomb.' 
Geralt said nothing. But didn't look away. 
'After,' continued Ciri, without the slightest difficulty withstanding his look, 'the village 
of Dun Dare. The local tavern has probably been burned and it is possible that the innkeeper 
has been murdered. It is my fault; I was blinded by hatred and revenge. If he had a family, I'll 
try and make it up to the survivors.' 
'You cannot make it up,' Geralt said, still looking at her. 
'I know,' she said sharply, almost angrily. 'But I will stand in front of them with humility. 
I will remember the look in their eyes. I hope that the memory of those eyes will protect me 
from similar mistakes. Do you understand, Geralt?' 
'I understand, Ciri,' Yennefer said. 'Both of us, we understand you very well, my dear. 
Let's go.' 
 
*** 
 
The horses ran as if carried by the wind of a magic storm. Alarmed by the trio of riders, a 
pilgrim on the road lifted his head. A merchant with a wagonload of goods, a felon fleeing 
the law, a settler who had been thrown out of his land. A bum looked up, a deserter and a 
wander with a staff. They raised their heads, astonished and frightened. Not believing their 
eyes. 
In Geso in Ebbing, stories began to circulate. About the Wild Hunt. About three ghostly 
riders. Rumours were invented and spun in the evenings, in smoky pubs that smelled of fried 
onions and butter and in meeting rooms and huts. Rumours were invented, told and 
exaggerated. A great war of heroism and chivalry, of honour and friendship as well as 
meaningless treachery. With sincere and faithful love, which always wins out in the end, 
about crime and punishment of criminals that are always struck by justice. 
The truth, as always rises up, like oil on water. 
They invented lies and enjoyed these fables. They revelled in pure fantasy. Because out in 
the real world, everything worked out the opposite. 
The legend grew. People listened as if in a trance, captivated by the emphatic words of 
the storyteller who told the story of the witcher and the sorceress. The story of the Tower of 
the Swallow. Of Ciri, the witcheress with the scarred face. Of Kelpie, the magical black mare. 
Of the Lady of the Lake. That came many years later. 
But for now, like a seed soaked by rain, the legend sprouted and grew among the people. 
 
*** 
 
They did not realise when May came. They first noticed at night time, when they saw the 
bright, distance fires of Belleteyn. When Ciri, with strange excitement jumped onto Kelpie's 
back and galloped towards the fires, Geralt and Yennefer took advantage of the intimate 
moment. 
After removing the necessary clothes, they made love on a sheepskin on the ground. They 
made love urgently, in silence, without words. They made love quickly, however. 

And then along came the climax and fulfilment, trembling and kissing each other's tears, 
amazed at that fate had given them time to express their love. 
 
*** 
 
'Geralt?' 
'I'm listening, Yen.' 
'When we... When we were not together, where you with other women?' 
'No.' 
'Not once?' 
'Not once.' 
'Your voice did not tremble. So I do not know why I don't believe you.' 
'I am only for you, Yen.' 
'Now I do.' 
 
*** 
 
 
Without realising it, May had arrived. Dandelions grew in the meadows and the trees 
were white and fluffy and thick with flowers. The oak, too noble to rush, remained dark, but 
on the edges, green leaves were beginning to show. 
 
*** 
 
One night they spent under the open sky, they witcher awakened from a nightmare. It 
seemed as if he was paralysed and helpless, a great grey owl was clawing at his face and with 
its sharp hooked beak, trying to peck his eyes out. He awoke. But he was not sure if he had 
moved from one nightmare to another. 
Over their encampment poured bright light that startled the horses. In the midst of the 
brightness a room was visible – a columned hall in a castle. Around a table sat ten figures. 
Ten women. 
He could hear words. Snippets of sentences. 
'...Bring her to us, Yennefer. We command you.' 
'You cannot give me orders. You cannot give orders to her. You don't have any power 
over her!' 
'I'm not afraid of them, mother. They cannot do anything. If they wish, I will stand before 
them. 
'We will meet on June first. At the new moon. We command you both to appear. We 
warn you, we'll punish any disobedience.' 
'I will come now, Philippa. Let her stay with him. Don't leave him alone. Just a couple of 
days. I will come immediately. As a show of good faith. I have vowed, Philippa. Please.' 
The light began to throb. The horses snorted , crazed and kicked at the ground. 
The witcher awoke. This time for real. 
 
*** 
 
The next day Yennefer confirmed his fears. After a long meeting, which they excluded 
Ciri from. 
'I'm leaving,' she said dryly. 'I have to. Ciri will stay with you. For a time. Then it will 
come time for her to leave as well. And then we'll all meet again.' 

Ne nodded. Reluctantly. He'd had enough of nodding silently, agreeing with every 
decision. But he nodded. One way or another, he loved her. 
'It is imperative,' she said mildly, 'that you not resist. Nor can you postpone it. It is 
necessary to comply. I'm doing this for your own good. And especially for the good of Ciri.' 
He nodded. 
'Until we meet again,' she said almost tenderly, 'I'll make it up to you, Geralt. There has 
been too much silence between us. Now instead of nodding, give me a hug and kiss.' 
He obeyed. One way or another, he loved her. 
 
*** 
 
'Now where?' Ciri asked, she had barely spoken since Yennefer had disappeared with a 
flash through her portal. 
'The river...' Geralt coughed, conquering the pain under his breast bone. 'The river in 
front of us is called the Sansretour. We are going upstream. To a place that I want to show 
you. It is a land of fairytales.' 
Ciri frowned. Her saw her clench her fists. 
'All fairytales,' she said, end badly. There does not exist a fairytale land.' 
'There does. You'll see.' 
 
*** 
 
It was the day after the full moon, when they saw Toussaint, bathed in green and the 
sunlight. When they saw the hills, slopes and vineyards. The roofs of towers and castles, 
shining in the morning sun. 
The view did not disappoint. It was impressive. As it always was. 
'This is beautiful,' Ciri said with delight. 'Wow! Those castles are like toys... Like glazed 
decorations on a cake3... It is tempting to lick!' 
'The architecture is by Faramond,' Geralt wisely instructed. 'Wait until you seen up close 
the palaces and gardens of Beauclair.' 
'Palace? We're going to the palace? You know the local king?' 
'Duchess.' 
'The Duchess,' she said wryly, watching him intently from beneath her fringe, 'doesn't 
have green eyes? Short black hair?' 
'No,' he snapped, looking away. 'She look completely different. I don't know where you 
got that idea...' 
'Let's not talk about it Geralt, all right? How do you know the local Duchess?' 
'As I said, I know her. A little bit. Not very well, if you're interested. But, I know the 
local prince consort or candidate for consort. You also know him, Ciri.' 
Ciri kicked Kelpie in the sides, making her dance in the road. 
'Don't make me suffer!' 
'Dandelion.' 
Dandelion? With the Duchess? How is that possible?' 
'It's a long story. We left him here, alongside his beloved. We promised him to visit on 
our return visit, when...' 
He paused and became serious. 
'There was nothing you could do,' Ciri said quietly. 'Do not torture yourself, Geralt. It's 
not your fault.' 
Yes it is my fault, he thought. Mine. Dandelion will ask. And I'll have to answer. Milva. 
Cahir. Regis. Angouleme. 

The sword of destiny cuts both ways. 
By all the gods, that's enough. Enough. We must end this once and for all! 
'Come on, Ciri.' 
'In these clothes?' she said. 'To the palace?' 
'I don't see anything wrong with our clothes,' he interrupted. 'We are not going to a ball. 
We can meet Dandelion in the stables.' He saw the look on her face and quickly added. 'I 
have to go down to the bank. I'll pick up some cash. In the squares and streets you'll find a 
lot of tailors and dressmakers. You can buy what you want and dress up how you please.' 
'Good,' she playfully cocked her head. 'You've got cash?' 
'You can buy yourself whatever you want,' he repeated. 'Even ermine. And basilisk 
shoes. I know a shoemaker, who should have some in stock.' 
'How did you make so much money?' 
'By killing. Let's go, Ciri, let's not waste time.' 
 
*** 
 
In the bank of Cianfanelli, Geralt requested a transfer, credit allocation and took some 
money. He wrote letters that were given to fast couriers that were riding for the Yaruga. He 
politely excused himself from the dinner invitation from the attentive and polite banker. 
Ciri waited in the street watching the horses. The street, which was empty a moment ago, 
was now swarming with people. 
'I think today is a holiday,' Ciri nodded with her head towards the square where the 
crowd was heading. 'Or a fair...' 
Geralt took a quick look. 
'That's not a fair.' 
'Ah...' Ciri stood up in her stirrups and looked around. 'So it's...' 
'A execution,' he confirmed. 'The most popular post-war entertainment. What are the 
reasons, Ciri?' 
'For desertion, treason, cowardice before the enemy,' she recited fluently. 'And for 
economic crimes.' 
'Supplying the army with mouldy biscuits,' said the witcher. 'During the war, an 
enterprising merchant can easily get into trouble.' 
'This does not look like the execution of a huckster,' Ciri pulled on Kelpie's reins, 
submerging herself in the middle of the crowd, 'Look, the scaffolding is covered with cloth 
and the executioner has a new, clean hood. He is executing someone important, perhaps a 
noble. So it could be cowardice in the face of the enemy...' 
'Toussaint,' Geralt shook his head, 'did not have an army that faced the enemy. No, Ciri, 
I guess this has to do with the economy. The condemned is probably guilty of some scam in a 
wine shop and damaged the foundation for the local economy. Let's go, Ciri. We don't need 
to watch this spectacle.' 
'How do you expect me to move?' 
Indeed, it was impossible to keep riding. They had become stuck in the crowd gathering 
in the square, and were unable to make their way to the other side of the market. 
Geralt looked back and swore. He discovered that they could not even turn around, people 
clogged the streets behind them. The crowd carried them like a river, but stopped in front of a 
solid wall of halberds standing around the gallows. 
'Here they come!' someone shouted and the crowd surged like a waved, picking up the 
cry. 'Here they come!' 
The pounding of hooves and the rattle of a cart were fully covered by the buzz of the 
crowd, which sounded like the hum of bumblebees. So they were caught completely by 

surprise by the appearance of a cart from an ally, drawn by two horses. On the cart, trying to 
maintain his balance with difficult was... 
'Dandelion...' Ciri groaned. 
Geralt suddenly felt ill. Very ill. 
'It's Dandelion,' Ciri said uneasily. 'It's him.' 
This is an injustice, thought the witcher. A damn injustice. This cannot be. This should not 
be. I know I was stupid and naive to believe that after all I had endured and experienced that 
destiny owed me. It was not only stupid, but egocentric. But I am aware, there is no need for 
destiny to persuade me. To prove it to me. Especially in this way. This is an injustice. 
'It cannot be Dandelion,' he said flatly, staring at Roach's mane. 
'It's him,' she said again. 'Geralt, we have to do something.' 
'What,' he asked bitterly. 'Tell me what?' 
The guard driving the cart treated Dandelion fairly, with surprising civility, without 
brutality, even differentially, as much as they could afford. At the foot of the steps to the 
gallows, they untied his hands. The poet nonchalantly scratched his ass and without hesitation 
began to climb the steps. 
One of the steps creaked suddenly and began to sag. Dandelion barely managed to keep 
his balance. 
'Damn!' he exclaimed. 'This needs to be fixed! You'll end up killing someone with these 
stairs! That would be a disaster!' 
Once Dandelion reached the gallows, two of the executioners henchmen in leather vests 
grabbed him. The executioner, a hulk with arms as wide as the bastions of a castle, watched 
the condemned through the slits cut in his hood. Nearby stood a man in rich, thought 
mournful black clothing. He face was no less mournful. 
'Citizens of Beauclair and people from the surrounding countryside,' he read in a troubled 
voice from parchment. 'Notice is hereby given that Julian Alfred Pankratz, Viscount de 
Lettenhove, aka Dandelion...' 
'Pankratz what?' Ciri asked in a whisper. 
'...according to the Supreme Court ruling of this County has been found guilty of all 
crimes, offenses and misdeed of which he was accused, insulting Her Majesty, treason of the 
state and dishonouring the establishment of the nobility through perjury, libel, and slander, 
also for dissipation and indecency, furthermore, obscenity and whoredom. The Tribunal had 
decided that Viscount Julian et cetera, et cetera, his receive the following punishment – First, 
mortification of his coat of arms, a thick black line through his shield. Second, confiscation of 
all his property, both movable and immovable, including lands, forests, castles and palaces...' 
'Castles and palaces?' said the astonished witcher. 'What?' 
Dandelion snickered, making it blatantly clear what he thought of the judicial decree. 
'Third, the maximum penalty... our ladyship Anna Henrietta, Duchess of Toussaint and 
Castilian of Beauclair, has kindly switched the penalty for the above crimes, namely being 
dragged by horses and dismemberment, by substituting it for decapitation by the axe. Let 
justice be done!' 
From the crowd came a few incoherent cries. Women standing in the first row pretended 
to weep and lament. Adults lifted children in their arms or put them on their shoulders, that 
even the smallest child would not miss the upcoming spectacle. The executions assistants 
rolled a stump into the center of the scaffold covered with cloth. There was much excitement 
when someone swiped the wicker basket designed to collect the severed head, but another 
was soon found. 
At the foot of the scaffold four ragged urchins held out a scarf to collect the blood in. 
There was a great demand for this type of souvenirs, and good money could be earned. 
'Geralt,' Ciri said in a low voice. 'We have to so do something...' 

He did not answer. 
'I wish to speak to the people,' Dandelion said proudly. 
'Keep it short, Viscount.' 
The poet walked to the edge of the scaffold and raised his arms. The crowd began to 
murmur and grew still. 
'Hey, folks' Dandelion called. 'What's new? How are you?' 
'Well,' someone from the crowd said after a moment. 
'I'm glad,' nodded the poet. 'In that case we can begin.' 
'Master Executioner,' the bailiff said pathetically. 'Do your duty!' 
The executioner approached, and according to ancient custom, knelt and bowed his head 
hooded head to the condemned. 
'Forgive me, my good man,' he said gloomily. 
'I?' Dandelion said, surprised. 'You?' 
'Mhm.' 
'Not for anything in the world.' 
'Huh?' 
'I will not forgive you for anything in the world. Why should I? Hear that, joker! In a 
moment, you will cut off my head, and you want me to forgive you? Are you kidding me or 
what? Shame on you! In such a sad moment.' 
'But sir,' said the executioner. 'This is the custom... It is your last duty in the world... The 
condemned should forgive his executioner. Good lord, forgive me, please...' 
'No,' 
'No?' 
'No!' 
'I will not kill him,' said the executioner standing up. "If he will not forgive me, I will not 
do anything.' 
'Lord Viscount,' the bailiff took Dandelion by the elbow. 'Do not make trouble. The 
people are gathered, waiting... Forgive him, when he begs so nicely...' 
'I will not forgive him and that's it!' 
'Master executioner,' the bailiff said turning to the executioner. 'Can you behead him 
without his forgiveness? I'll repay you...' 
The executioner wordlessly held out his open hand, as wide as a pan. The bailiff sighed, 
pulled out a purse and poured some coins into the hand. The executioner looked and then 
clenched his fist. He rolled his eyes within his hood. 
'Okay,' he agreed, he hid the money and walked back over to the condemned. 'Knee 
down, stubborn sir. Put your head on the block. If I want I can be stubborn and mischievous 
too. I can cut twice what I can do in one. Or in three.' 
'I forgive you!' Dandelion promptly shouted. 'I forgive you!' 
'Thank you.' 
'Since you have been given your pardon,' said the mournful bailiff, 'return my money.' 
'The executioner turned on his heel and raised his axe. 
'Move aside, sir,' he said in an ominously hollow voice. 'You know that according to the 
rules that you must not interfere with the performance of the execution. When I chop the 
head, blood flies.' 
The bailiff backed away so rapidly that he almost fell from the scaffold. 
'Is this right?' Dandelion knelt and stretched his neck across the stump. 'Master? Hey, 
Master!' 
'What do you want?' 
'You were kidding, right? When you said you wouldn't behead me with the first blow? 
You'll only cut once? Right?' 

The executioner's eyes sparkled. 
'It'll be a surprise,' he growled ominously. 
The crowd suddenly parted before a rider who burst into the square on a lathered horse. 
'Halt!' the rider called, waving a large roll of parchment with a red seal. 'Stop the 
execution! On the orders of our Lady Duchess! Stop the execution! I'm here to bring 
clemency for the accused.' 
'Not again,' growled the executioner lowering his axe sullenly. 'Another pardon? This is 
getting boring.' 
'A pardon! A reprieve!' roared the crowd. The women in the first row started wailing 
even louder. The children whistled and booed with disappointment. 
'Hush, people!' shouted the bailiff and unrolled the parchment. 'This is the will of 
Duchess Anne Henrietta! In her immense goodness and to celebrate the peace of Cintra Her 
Ladyship has waived all charges against Julian Alfred Pankratz, Viscount de Lettenhove and 
pardons him from execution...' 
'My Dear Ermine,' Dandelion said, smiling broadly. 
'...And orders that the above Viscount Julian et cetera promptly leave the capital and the 
County of Toussaint and never return, because his presence is no longer welcome here, and 
her Ladyship never wants to lay eyes on him again. You are free, Viscount.' 
'What about my property?' the troubadour said indignantly. 'My lands, forests and castles 
you can have, but let me take my lute, my horse, Pegasus, my one hundred and forty 
ducatsand eighty dimes, my cloak lined with duck, my ring...' 
'Shut up!' shouted Geralt, pushing through the crowd on his horse. 'Shut up and get down 
here you mutton head! Ciri, clear us a way! Dandelion! Did you hear what I said?' 
'Geralt? Is that you?' 
'Stop your questions and get down from there right now! Come here! Jump up!' 
They walked through the crowd and went into a gallop down a close alley. Ciri went first, 
followed by Geralt and Dandelion riding Roach. 
'What's the rush?' the bard asked from behind the witcher. 'No one is persecuting us.' 
'For now. The Duchess is likely to change her mind and revoke what she previously 
decided. Admit it – you knew you were going to get a pardon?' 
'No, I didn't,' Dandelion muttered. 'But I counted on it. My Ermine has a good heart.' 
'Stop with the Ermine, dammit. You just got pardoned for insults against Her Majesty, 
you don't want a recurrence.' 
The troubadour was silent. Ciri stopped Kelpie and waited for them. When they arrived, 
she saw Dandelion wiping tears from his eyes. 
'Look at him,' she said. 'A viscount...' 
'Let's go,' the witcher urged. 'Let's get out of this town and out of the borders of this 
lovely country. While there is still time.' 
 
*** 
 
When they were almost to the border of Toussaint, in sight of the mountain Gorgon, And 
official overtook them. He brought Pegasus, a saddle, a lute and Dandelion's ring. He did not 
listen to the question on the hundred and forty ducats. 
He ignored the bard's plea to give a kiss to the Duchess with a straight face. 
They followed the course of the Sansretour, until it became a small stream. The bypassed 
Belhaven. 
They camped in the valley of Newi. In a place that the witcher and the bard remembered 
well. 
Dandelion lasted a long time without asking questions. 

But finally they had to tell him everything. And sit with him in silence. During the hard, 
painful silence that reigned, when all was said. 
 
*** 
 
At noon the next day they were on the slopes of Riedburne. The peace was prevailing 
throughout the area. People were trusting and accommodating. They felt safe. 
At the crossroads gallows were laden with corpses. 
They passed through towns on their way towards Dol Angra. 
'Dandelion,' Geralt just now noticed what he should have noticed a while ago. 'Your 
priceless tube! Your memoirs. The courier didn't bring it, it's still in Toussaint.' 
'I left it,' the poet said indifferently. 'In Ermine's dressing room, under a pile of coats, 
clothes and corsets. And they can stay there for centuries.' 
'Do you want to explain it?' 
'There's nothing to explain. In Toussaint I had enough time to carefully read everything 
that I had written.' 
'And what?' 
'I'll write it again. From the beginning.' 
'I understand,' said Geralt. 'You're a lousy writer as well as a royal favourite. To put it 
bluntly, what you touch you screw up. Half a century and you still have the possibility of 
correcting and re-writing, but not for the Duchess. What a shame, a lover driven away. Yes, 
yes, there is no reason to make faces! Being married to the Duchess of Toussaint was not 
written for you, Dandelion.' 
'That remains to be seen.' 
'Do not count on me.' 
'Nobody asked you anything. But I can tell you that my Ermine has a good heart, and is a 
very forgiving woman. It is true that she was unnerved when she caught me with the young 
Baroness Nique... But surely she has calmed down, she will realise that I was not made for 
monogamy. She'll forgive me and be waiting...' 
'You are hopelessly stupid,' Geralt said and Ciri nodded vigorously to indicate she felt 
the same way. 
'I will not argue with you,' Dandelion said, offended. 'It's an intimate matter. But I am 
sure that she will forgive me. I'll write a touching ballad or sonnet, I'll sent it to Toussaint 
and...' 
'Have mercy!' 
'Oh, you don't want to talk about it. Come on, let's go! Forward, Pegasus! Forward!' 
They rode. 
It was the month of May. 
 
*** 
 
'Because of you,' the witcher said reproachfully, 'we had to run away from Toussaint like 
outlaws or bandits. I did not have any time to see...' 
'Fringilla Vigo? You would not have seen her. She left shortly after your departure, In 
January. She simply disappeared.' 
'I did not mean her,' Geralt coughed, looking over at Ciri who was listening. 'I wanted to 
see Reynart. To introduce him to Ciri...' 
Dandelion bowed his head. 

'The good knight Reynart de Bois-Fresnes,' Dandelion said, 'fell in late February when 
facing some invaders near the border fortress of Vedette near the Cervantesa Pass. Anarietta 
bestowed on him posthumously...' 
'Shut up, please.' 
Dandelion was silent and incredibly obedient. 
 
*** 
 
May continued and grew. The intense yellow thistle in meadows disappeared, replaced by 
blooming, white, fluffy dandelions. 
It was very green and warm. The air, after brief thunderstorms became hot, dense and 
sticky as barley porridge. 
 
*** 
 
On the twenty-sixth of May they crossed the Yaruga on a new, white resin scented bridge. 
Remnants of the old bridge, black, burnt, charred piles were still visible in the water and on 
the shore. 
Ciri began to get restless. 
Geralt knew why. He knew her intentions, her plans and arrangement with Yennefer. He 
was ready. Yet the thought of the painful parting stung his heart. As if in his chest a 
poisonous scorpion had awakened. 
 
*** 
 
At the crossroads of the village of Koprivince, was an inn burned during the war and next 
to it stood a hundred year old oak, now in bloom. The population of the whole area, even 
from distant Spall, regularly used the oak tress low hanging branches to hung tablets and 
posters with all kinds of information. It served the people as communication. The tree was 
known as the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil. 
'Ciri, you start from that side,' Geralt ordered dismounting form his saddle. 'Dandelion 
you look from the other side.' 
The branches draped with tablets, swayed in the light wind and clattered and bumped into 
each other. 
As was usual after a war, a lot of the messages were for missing family members. Quite a 
few of the messages were along the lines of – "Come back, all is forgiven," there were 
listings for erotic massage and related services in surrounding villages and towns and lots of 
news and advertising. 
Hung here and there were love letters next to denunciations, both signed and anonymous. 
They found there tablets containing philosophical considerations – either incomprehensible, 
absurd, obscene or disgusting. 
'Hey,' Dandelion called. 'The castle of Rastburg needs a witcher. They offer great 
rewards. Comfortable accommodation and delicious meals are provided. Any interest, 
Geralt?' 
'Not at all.' 
Ciri found the message she had been looking for. 
She announced to the witcher what he had long been expecting. 
 
*** 
 

'I'm going to Vengerberg, Geralt,' she repeated. 'Don't give me that look. You know that 
I have an obligation. Yennefer is calling me. She is waiting there.' 
'I know.' 
'And you are going to Rivia, to your secret meeting...' 
'It's a surprise,' he interrupted. 'It isn't a secret.' 
'Okay, a surprise. I meanwhile, will go to Vengerberg and solve everything, I'll pick up 
Yennefer and in six days we will see you in Rivia. I asked you not to give me that look. We 
do not have to say goodbye like it is forever. It will only be six days. Goodbye.' 
'Goodbye, Ciri.' 
'In Rivia, in six days,' she insisted once again, turning Kelpie about. 
She kicked her into a gallop and was quickly out of sight. Geralt felt as if icy claws were 
clawing at his stomach. 
'Six days,' Dandelion repeated thoughtfully. 'From here to Vengerberg and then back to 
Rivia... That will total about two hundred and fifty miles... That's impossible, Geratl. Of 
course, with that magical mare, she can travel three times faster than us. But even a magical 
mare must need to rest. And Ciri's mysterious issue must be resolved. Come on, its 
impossible...' 
'For Ciri,' the witcher cut him off, 'nothing is impossible.' 
'But...' 
'She is no longer the girl you knew,' Geralt did not let him finish. 
Dandelion was silent for a long time. 
'I have a strange feeling...' 
'Be quiet. Don't say anything. I'm begging you.' 
 
*** 
 
May ended. They were approaching the new moon, the moon was just a sliver. They rode 
towards the mountains visible on the horizon. 
 
*** 
 
It was a typical post-war landscape. Among the fields rose graves and burial mounds, in 
the lush spring grass were white skulls and skeletons. On the branches of trees hung corpses 
and along the road, waiting for the beggars to weaken, sat wolves. 
Grass did not grow on the vast stretches of blackness, where past fires had burned. 
Yet many of the villages and settlements, where only ruins had remained, had started to 
rebuild. Around them was the sounds of axes and hammers hammering and saws cutting. 
Near the ruins were women, working the scorched earth with their hoes. Some stumbling, 
dragged ploughs behind them, the straps cutting into their shoulders. 
 'I have a vague feeling, said Dandelion, 'that something is not as it should be. There's 
something missing... Do you have the same feeling, Geralt?' 
'Huh?' 
'Something here is not normal.' 
'Nothing here is normal, Dandelion. Nothing.' 
 
*** 
 
It was a hot night, black, with no wind, lit by only distant flashes of lightning and upset 
by the rumour of thunder. Geralt and Dandelion camped and watched the horizon to the west 

glow red with fires. It was not long until the breeze picked up and brought the smell of 
smoke. And snippets of sound. 
They heard women crying and the wailing of children and the sound of their murderers 
howling. 
Dandelion did not say anything, but kept throwing glances at the witcher. But the witcher 
did not move, did not even turn his head. His face was like stone. 
In the morning they went on their way. Rising above the forest was a wisp of smoke, 
which they did not look at. 
Later that day they encountered a column of settlers. 
 
*** 
 
The column moved in a long, slow march. They carried small bundles. They were 
completely silent. Men, boys, women, children. They did not utter a cry or a word of 
complaint. Not a cry or groan of despair. Their cries and despair were mirrored in their eyes. 
The empty eyes of aggrieved people. Deprived, battered and expelled. 
'Who are these people?' Dandelion said, not paying attention to the eyes of the officer 
who watched over the displaced people. 'Why are they forced to leave?' 
'Nilfgaardians,' replied a young lieutenant from his saddle, no older than eighteen. 
'Nilfgaardian settlers. They settled on our land like cockroaches. And we are sweeping them 
away like cockroaches as agreed in the peace treaty of Cintra.' 
He spat and looked disdainfully at the troubadour and the witcher. 
'And if it was up to me, I'd not let these bugs live.' 
'And if it was up to me,' said a sergeant with a grey moustache, regarding his youthful 
companion with disrespect, 'I'd let them work in peace on their farms and lands. I would 
never expel a good farmer from this country. I would love to see agriculture prosper. So we 
will not go hungry.' 
'You're a real blockhead, Sergeant,' the young Lieutenant scolded. 'They are of 
Nilfgaard! These people do not know our language, our culture or have our blood. For the 
small joy of having agriculture we would be taking a snake to our breast. We would have 
traitors ready to attack from behind. Or do you think this peace with the Black Ones will last 
forever. No, no, they go back to where they came from... Eh, soldier! There on goes with a 
cart! Grab him, quickly!' 
The order was carried out eagerly. With the help of fists, heels and sticks. 
 Dandelion coughed. 
The young officer measured they suspiciously. 
'You are not from Nilfgaard?' 
'Gods forbid,' swallowed the troubadour. 
Many of the women and children passing in front of them moved like puppets, with 
empty eyes, swollen faces and bruised bare legs showing through torn skirts. Some had to be 
supported as they walked. Dandelion looked at Geralt's face and began to panic. 
'It's time to be on our way,' he muttered. 'Farewell, gentlemen.' 
The young officer did not even turn his head, intrigued by monitoring the refugees. 
The column meandered slowly to the south. From somewhere behind them they heard a 
high, desperate scream from a female. 
'Geralt, no,' Dandelion whispered. 'Do not interfere, stay out of it...' 
The witcher turned and looked at the poet as if he did not know him. 
'Meddle in it?' he shrugged. 'Save someone? Give my life for noble principles and 
ideals? No, Dandelion, not anymore.' 
 

*** 
 
On a restless night, illuminated by lightning, the witcher again awakened from a dream. 
This time he was not sure if it was one hideous nightmare or if it was a series of nightmares. 
Again, over the remains of the fire a light arose, pulsating and frightening the horses. 
Again, inside that light appeared a castle, with columns and a table at which sat women. 
Two other women were there, standing calmly. One black and white and the other black 
and grey. 
Yennefer and Ciri. 
The witcher moaned in his sleep. 
 
*** 
 
Yennefer was right when she did not allow her to wear male clothing. Ciri would have 
felt foolish dressed as a boy among these elegant ladies. She was glad that she gave in to the 
combination of black and grey, it flattered her and she could fell the approval when they saw 
the puffy sleeves and clinched waist and the small brooch in the shape of a rose. 
'Come closer please.' 
Ciri shivered slightly. It was not just the sound of the voice. Yennefer, as it turned out, 
was right about her neckline. Ciri had insisted thought, and now she had the impression that 
she could feel a draft on her breast all the way down to her navel, and was covered in goose 
bumps. 
'Closer still,' said the dark-haired and dark-eyed woman whom Ciri remembered from the 
island of Thanedd. And though Yennefer had taught her all the names of the women she 
would meet in this castle, Ciri immediately though of her as Lady Owl. 
'We welcome you,' Lady Owl said. 'To the Lodge in Montecalvo, Ciri.' 
Ciri bowed as instructed by Yennefer, politely, but without lowering her eyes modestly 
like a maiden. 
It was answered with a sincere smile from Triss Merigold and a nod and a friendly look 
from Margarita Laux-Antille. The looks from the other women where hard as augers. As the 
blade of a piercing spear. 
'Sit down,' Lady owl nodded towards a seat. 'No, not you, Yennefer! Only her. You, 
Yennefer, are not an invited guest, but are summoned to be tried and punished as a 
wrongdoer. You'll stand for as long as it takes the Lodge to decide your fate.' 
In a twinkling of an eye, Ciri ended protocol. 
'In that case, I will stand also,' she said in a loud voice. 'I have not come as a guest. I too, 
was summoned to decide my fate. That's the first thing. The second thing is that Yennefer's 
fate is linked with mine. We are inextricably linked and that cannot be changed... With all 
due respect.' 
Margarita Laux-Antille smile and looked her in the eyes. The simple yet elegant, Assire 
var Anahid, a Nilfgaardian with a slightly aquiline nose, nodded and tapped her fingers gently 
on the table's surface. 
'Philippa,' said a woman with a silver fox boa around her neck. 'I think that in this 
respect we should not go to extremes. At this point it is not necessary. This is the round table 
of the Lodge, and all who sit at it are equals – even when one of us is on trial. I think that we 
can agree...' 
She did not finish, she glanced at all the sorceresses. One by one, they all nodded their 
heads in agreement – Margarita, Triss, Assire, Sabrina Glevissig, Keira Metz and both elves. 
Only the second Nilfgaardian, the dark-haired Fringilla Vigo did not give an affirmative nod, 
she was pale as death as she stared at Yennefer. 

'So be it,' Philippa Eilhart waved her hand. 'Sit, both of you. But know that I am against 
it. But the unity of the Lodge and its interests are most important. The Lodge is everything, 
the rest is nothing. I hope you understand, Ciri?' 
'Perfectly,' Ciri said, not looking away from her gaze. 'Especially since I am supposed to 
be the nothing.' 
The beautiful queen of the elves, Francesca Findabair laughed. 
'Congratulations, Yennefer,' she said in her hypnotically deep and melodious voice. 'I 
noticed you left your mark. This is gold. I recognise the school.' 
'It's easy to recognise,' Yennefer looked around with fiery eyes, 'because it is the school 
of Tissaia de Vries.' 
'Tissaia de Vries is dead,' Lady Owl said calmly. 'We mourn her, and gladly. Her death, 
however, was a turning point. Now is a new time and big changes are coming. You, Ciri, you 
were once Princess Cirilla of Cintra, but fate has now given you a different role. Surely you 
already know what it is.' 
'I know,' said Ciri, not listening to the warning hiss from Yennefer. 'Vilgefortz explained 
it to me! He was going to stick a glass tube between my legs. If this is to be the fate that 
awaits me, then thank you very much.' 
Philippa's dark eyes blazed with frosty fury. But it was Sile de Tansarville that spoke next 
to Ciri. 
'You still have a lot to learn, girl,' she said, covering her neck with her silver fox boa. 
'Many of the things you have seen and heard you will need to unlearn. Alone or with 
assistance. You have acquired a lot of bad habits, no doubt because of the evil you have 
experienced in this world. But this is childish stubbornness, and now you can't see that when 
someone only has your best interests at heart. You lash out around you with your claws like a 
wild kitten, so you have given us no choice. We will take you by the neck and treat you like a 
child, without a second thought. Because we are older, wiser and we know everything about 
what was, what is and we know a lot about what will be. We will take you by the neck like a 
child, so one day when you are a wise cat, you will sit here at this table, among us. One of us. 
No! Not a word! Do not dare open your mouth while Sile de Tansarville speaks.' 
The sorceress from Kovir voice was sharp and penetrating as a knife scratching on iron, 
and hung over the table. Ciri was not the only one to shrink and draw he head down between 
her shoulders but other magicians of the Lodge as well, with maybe the exception of 
Philippa, Francesca and Assire. And Yennefer. 
'You are right,' said Sile, adjusting the boa around her neck again, 'you were called to 
Montecalvo to meet your fate. But you were not right when you complained that you are 
nothing. You are everything, you are the world's future. At this point in time, you cannot 
even understand, because you are just a kitten, a child who sees everyone as Vilgefortz or 
Emhyr var Emries. At this point, it is not worth explaining that you are wrong. This is all for 
your sake and for the sake of the world. There will time for such explanations later. For now, 
you do not want to hear the voice of reason, and you riposte every argument with a child's 
stubbornness. So now you'll be taken by the neck. I'm done. Philippa, declare the girl's fate.' 
'You are coming with me,' Lady Owl said, breaking the heavy silence, 'and Sile to Kovir, 
to Pont Vanis, the summer capital of the kingdom. As you are no longer Cirilla of Cintra, 
during the course of the audience you will be presented as an adept of magic, being protected 
by us. At that audience you will meet a very wise king, Esterad Thyssen. You will meet his 
wife, the Queen Zuleyka, a person of singular nobility and goodness. You will also meet their 
son and heir, Prince Tancred.' 
Ciri was beginning to understand and rolled her eyes. Lady Owl did not miss that detail. 
'Yes,' she confirmed. 'First of all you must impress prince Tancred. because you are 
going to become his lover and give him a child.' 

'If you were still Cirilla of Cintra,' Philippa continued after a long pause, 'still the 
daughter of Pavetta and granddaughter of Calanthe, you would become Prince Tancred's 
legal wife. You'd be the princess and later the queen of Poviss and Kovir. Unfortunately, and 
I tell you with genuine regret, fate has deprived you of everything. Including your future. You 
will only be his mistress. His favourite.' 
'In name,' interjected Sile, 'and formally. In practice, we will in fact, endeavour to ensure 
that you are beside Tancred with the status of princess and later eventually queen. Naturally, 
we will need your help. Tancred has to want to have you by his side. Day and night. We will 
show you how to stimulate that desire, but it is up to your to bear the fruit of our teachings.' 
'All this is not important, at the end of the day,' said Lady Owl. 'The important thing is 
that you get pregnant to Tancred as soon as possible.' 
'Yeah, sure,' muttered Ciri. 
'Yours and Tancred's child,' Philippa watched here with dark eyes, 'will ensure the future 
and status of this Lodge. Take note that it will be a great thing. You will be a part of it, 
because right after the birth you will sit with us at this table. We will teach you. You are one 
of us, even if you do not want to admit it yet.' 
'On the island of Thanedd,' ciri overcame the tightness in her throat, 'you said I was a 
mindless tool, even a monster, Lady Owl and now you say that I am one of you.' 
'There is not that much difference,' the Daisy of the valley said in a ringing voice. 'We, 
me luned, are all monsters. Each in our own way. Is that not right, Lady Owl?' 
Philippa shrugged. 
'That ugly scar on your face,' Sile said indifferently, 'we will magically remove or 
disguise. You will be a beautiful and mysterious woman, and I guarantee that Tancred 
Thyssen will go crazy for you. We will have to invent some personal details. Cirilla is a nice 
name and not so rare, so you can keep it. But you still need a last name. I would not be 
against it, if you used mine.' 
'Or mine,' Lady Owl said covering the smile on the corner of her lips. 'Cirilla Eilhart also 
sounds nice.' 
'That name,' the hall rang with the silvery voice of the elven queen, 'is pretty in any 
combination. And each of us here would love to have a daughter like you, Zireael, Swallow 
with the eyes of a hawk. You are the body and the blood of Lara Dorren. Each of us would 
give everything, even this Lodge and the fate of the kingdoms around the world, to have such 
a daughter. However, it is impossible. We know that it is impossible. So we envy Yennefer.' 
'Thank you, Lady Philippa,' Ciri said after a few moments, squeezing the head of the 
sphinxes in her hands. 'I also feel honoured with the proposal to take the surname de 
Tansarville. However, it seems to me that my new last name is the only thing that I can 
choose for myself, I thank the two mistresses. But I want to be called Cirilla of Vengerberg, 
daughter of Yennefer.' 
'Ha!' a sorceress flashed her teeth, who Ciri guessed to be Sabrina Glevissig of Kaedwen. 
'Tancred Thyssen will be a fool if he does not marry her. If he instead choose another 
princess, he would be a fool and blind, not to recognise the diamond among the glass beads 
Yenna, I envy you. And you know how sincere I can be with my envy.' 
Yennefer thanked her with a gesture. Without a shadow of a smile. 
'So,' Philippa said, 'all is taken care of.' 
'No,' said Ciri. 
Francesca Findabair snorted quietly. Sile de Tansarville raised her head and her 
expression hardened. 
'I have to think about it,' Ciri said. 'Meditate. Put my thoughts in order. Calmly. And 
when I'm done I will come back here, to Montecalvo, and come before this Lodge and 
discuss what has been decided.' 

Sile moved her lips, as if she had noticed a bad taste in her mouth and wanted to sit it out 
immediately. But she remained silent. 
'I have to meet,' continued Ciri, 'with the witcher Geralt in the city of Rivia. I promised 
that I would be there and that Yennefer would accompany me. I will fulfil my promise, with 
or without your consent. Lady Rita, here knows that, when I go to Geralt, i9can always find a 
hole in the wall.' 
Margarita Laux-Antille nodded with a smile. 
'I need to talk to Geralt. Say goodbye to him. And tell him the truth. You should know 
one thing, ladies. When we left castle Stygga, leaving behind their dead and ours, I asked 
Geralt if it was all over, if we had won, if evil was defeated then good had prevailed. He did 
not answer, he just smiled a sad smile. I thought it was from fatigue and the sorrow of leaving 
all his friends buried under the walls. Only now I know what his smile meant. It was a 
sympathetic smile at the naivety of a child who believed that killing Vilgefortz and Bonhart 
represented the triumph of good over evil. have to try and convince Geralt that what you 
ladies want to do with me, differs substantially from what Vilgefortz wanted to do with his 
glass tube. I'll try and explain to him the differences between castle Montecalvo and castle 
Stygga, although Vilgefortz thought he was doing was for the good of the world and you 
ladies also do for the good of the world. I know it is not going to be easy to convince as old 
wolf like Geralt. Geralt will say that I'm a brat and can easily be fooled into doing noble 
things. But I have to try. It is important that he understand it, that he accepts it. It is very 
important. Also for you ladies.' 
'you did not understand,' Sile de Tansarville snapped sharply. 'You're still a snotty nosed 
girl who replaced whining with arrogance. The only thing that gives me some hope is the 
acumen of your mind. You learn quickly. Believe me, you will soon laugh at the stupid things 
you have said here. Relative to your trip to Rivia, I express my strong opposition. It is a 
matter of principle, to prove to you that I, Sile de Tansarville, never talk to the wind. That I 
can grab the necks of the rebellious. It is for your own good, to learn discipline.' 
'Therefore, let us resolve this issue,' said Philippa Eilhart, placing her hands on the table. 
'Let each of us express our opinion. Should we allow this arrogant maid, Ciri, to travel to 
Rivia? To meet with the witcher, for whom there is no place in her life? Are we to allow this 
sentimentality, which we will soon have to rid her of? Sile is against. What about the other 
ladies?' 
'I am also against,' Sabrina Glevissig announced. 'Also as a matter of principle. The girl, 
I like. I like her arrogance and stubbornness, it is better than flabby softness. I have nothing 
against her pleading. I have no doubt that she would return - I respect her word. But the girl 
has dared to threaten. So let her know that threats are no to be tolerated.' 
'I'm against it,' said Keira Metz. 'For purely practical reasons. I also like the girl and 
Geralt delivered me out of the hands of danger on Thanedd. It is a sentiment that I long ago gt 
rid of, but I do not deny that it was pleasant to me. I could repay him this way. But will not. 
Because you are wrong, Sabrina. This girl is a witcheress and is trying to be smarter than us. 
In short, she is just trying to get away.' 
'Does anyone here,' Yennefer said ominously, dragging her words, 'dare doubt the word 
of my daughter?' 
'Be silent, Yennefer,' Philippa hissed. 'Do not talk, or I'll lose patience. We have two 
votes against. Let's listen to the others.' 
'I am in favour of letting her go,' said Triss Merigold. 'I know her and can vouch for her. 
I would also, if permitted, accompany her on this trip. To help, if I may, in her meditations 
and reflections. And with her conversation with Geralt.' 
'I also vote for her,' Margarita said with a smile. 'You may wonder at my motivations, 
ladies, but I do it for Tissaia de Vries. If Tissaia was among us she would not agree that in 

order to maintain the unity of the Lodge it is necessary to use coercive methods or restriction 
of personal freedom.' 
'I vote for her,' said Francesca Findabair, adjusting the lace at her neckline. 'I have many 
reasons, but I do not wish to explain them.' 
'I vote for her,' said Ida Emean aep Sivney. 'So my heart dictates.' 
'I'm against it,' Assire var Anahid said dryly. 'I do not decide out of lack of sympathy, 
antipathy or principled reasons. I fear for her life. Under the protection of the Lodge, Ciri is 
safe and on the route to Rivia she will be an easy target. I fear those that stole her identity and 
even her name, still don't think that it's enough.' 
'We have,' Sabrina said sarcastically, 'yet to know the opinion of Lady Fringilla Vigo. I 
guess that it is obvious. We all remember the castle Rhys-Rhune.' 
'I am grateful for the reminder,' Fringilla cocked her head proudly. 'I am for Ciri. To 
prove the admiration and affection I have for the girl. I also do it for the witcher, Geralt of 
Rivia, without which the girl would not be sitting here today. To save Ciri, he went to the 
edge of the world and fought everyone trying to prevent him - even himself. It would be 
shameful to deny him a meeting with his daughter.' 
'I have not heard here any shameful acts,' Sabrina said cynically. 'But a lot of naive 
sentimentality. Just such sentimentality that we want to eradicate from the girl. The results 
are that the scales have settled in deadlock. We have not decided anything. We need to vote 
again. I suggest that this time we do it secretly.' 
'Why?' 
All looked at the one who spoke - at Yennefer. 
'I am still a member of the Lodge,' said Yennefer. 'I have not been deprived of 
membership, you have not put anyone else in my place, so I have the right to vote. Certainly I 
know how I will vote. My vote therefore pushes the scales over and settles the matter.' 
'Your insolence,' Sabrina said, lacing her fingers together, loaded with onyx rings, 
'borders on bad taste, Yennefer.' 
'If I was in your place, madam, I would keep a discreet silence,' Sile added gravely. 'And 
be fearful of another vote, to deal with you.' 
'I voted for Ciri,' Francesca said, 'but you, Yennefer, I have to call to order. You ran 
away from the Lodge, refusing to cooperate. But you have responsibilities and obligations, 
debts that you have to repay, the verdict must be made. Otherwise you would not have been 
allowed to cross the threshold of Montecalvo.' 
Yennefer grabbed Ciri, who was dying to get up and scream. Finally, without resistance, 
Ciri dropped back into her chair in silence. Lady Owl, suddenly rose from her seat, 
dominating the whole table. 
'Yennefer,' she proclaimed loudly, 'you are not entitled to a vote, that is clear. But I am. I 
have heard all the voices present. I guess, I will finally make my vote.' 
'Who do you vote, Philippa?' Sabrina frowned. 
Philippa Eilhart looked across the table. She met Ciri's green eyes and stared at them. 
 
*** 
 
The bottom of the pond was a multicoloured mosaic, the coloured tiles appeared to move. 
Sitting on the pong creating shadows were the broad leaves of water lilies hiding goldfish. 
The water's surface reflected the dark eyes of a little girl, he long hair floated on the water. 
The girl had forgotten the whole world, laying on the edge of the pool with her little hands in 
the water. 

She went to try and touch those gold and red fish. The fish approached her fingers and 
palms, curiously circling around them, but she couldn't catch them. They remained as elusive 
as light and shadow, as the water itself. The dark-eyed girl fingers clutched emptiness. 'Philippa!' 
It was the most beloved voice in the world. And yet she was not a little girl now. 
Furthermore, she was not looking into the water. The water lilies, fish and reflection were gone. 
'Philippa!' 
 
*** 
'Philippa!' Sile de Tansarville's sharp voice pulled her from her reflections. 'We are 
waiting.' 
Through the open window cam the cold wind of spring. Philippa Eilhart shuddered. 
Death, she thought. Death has passed by my side/ 
'This Lodge,' she said at last in a firm voice, 'is to decide the fate of the world. So, this 
Lodge must reflect the world. Here, equilibrium and wisdom does not always mean cold and 
selfish, calculation and vileness, and sentimentality is not always naive. On one hand, iron discipline and on the other responsibility, resistance to violence, gentleness and trust. 
Cool reason... And heart.' 
'I,' she said into the silence that reigned after her introduction, 'cast the last vote. I will 
take into account one more thing. An element that without balancing anything, balances 
everything.' 
Following her gaze, everyone looked at the wall, to a mosaic of many multicolour tiles 
depicted the snake Uroboros, biting it's own tail. 
'That thing,' she continued, staring with her dark eyes at Ciri, 'is destiny in which i, 
Philippa Eilhart have only begun to believe in recently, which I have only recently begun to 
understand. Destiny is not the way to providence or comfortable fatalism. Destiny is hope. I 
am full of hope that it will become what we want to happen, so I give my vote to Ciri - Child 
of Destiny, Child of Hope' 
In the pillared hall of Montecalvo the was silence for a long time. from outside of the 
window came the hunting cry from a sea eagle. 
'Lady Yennefer,' Ciri whispered. 'It means...' 
'Come, my daughter,' Yennefer whispered back. 'Geralt is waiting for is and it is a long 
road ahead.' 
 
*** 
 
Geralt awoke suddenly and sat up. He heard the echoing cry of a sea eagle. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Then the witcher and the sorceress were married at a glorious wedding. They stayed for a 
long time and ate honey and drank wine. 
They lived happily ever after, but very briefly. He died of a heart attack. She died soon 
after, of what the story does not mention. They say that it was with regret and longing, but 
who would believe in such fairy tales. 
 
Flourens Delannoy 
Fairytales and Stories 
 
 
 

