Chapter Eight 
 
 
'Cadet Fitz-Osterlen, you've fail. Sit down. I would like to draw your attention to this 
cadet's ignorance of important and famous events from the history of his native country that 
every good citizen and patriot should know, but for a future office is simply inexcusable. And 
one more thing, cadet. For twenty years I have worked at this school and I do not remember 
even a single semester when an exam hasn't had a question about the Battle of Brenna. Your 
ignorance practically eliminates your chances for a military career, but when you become a 
baron, there is no obligation to become an officer, so maybe you can try your hand at politics. 
Or diplomacy. I wish this wholeheartedly, Cadet Fitz-Osterlen. The rest of us will get back to 
the Battle of Brenna, gentlemen. Cadet Puttkammer!' 
'Present!' 
'To the map, please and continue. From where the lord Baron's knowledge failed.' 
'As ordered! When Field Marshal Menno Coehoorn heard the reports from the secret 
service confirming that the Nordling's armies were coming to aid the besieged fortress of 
Mayena, he decided to make a quick march to the west. His plan was to cut off the enemy 
troops and to force them into a decisive battle. For this purpose he distributed the Center 
Group Army. Some of his forces he left at Mayena, the rest of his forces rapid marched...' 
'Cadet Puttkammer! Are you a writer of historical fiction or a future military 
commander? What is the name for "the rest of his forces"? Please give me the exact orde de 
bataille of Marshal Coehoorn's strike team. Using military terminology!' 
'Yes, commander. Field Marshal Coehoorn had at that time, two armies – the Fourth 
Cavalry Army, led by Major General Marcus Braibant, patron of our school...' 
'Very good, Cadet Puttkammer.' 
'Fucking toady,' Cadet Fitz-Osterlen hissed from his bench. 
'...And the Third Army, commanded by Lieutenant General Rhetz de Mellis-Stoke. The 
Fourth Cavalry Army, with a strength of twenty thousand soldiers was comprised of the 
following units – the Venendal Division, the Magne Division, the Frundsberg Division, the 
Second Vicovaro Brigade, the Seventh Daerlan Brigade, the Nauzicaa Division and the 
Vrihedd Brigade. The Third Army was composed of the Alba Division, the Deithwen 
Division and... umm. The Division...' 
 
*** 
 
'The Ard Feainn Division,' said Julia Abatemarco. 'If your men didn't mistake anything. 
They really had banners with silver suns on them?' 
'Yes, Colonel,' said the commander of the scouts, without hesitation. 
'So, Ard Feainn,' mused Pretty Kitty. 'That's interesting. This means that in the three 
marching columns that you saw, not only is the Fourth Army coming against us, but most of 
the Third as well. I do not believe it; I have to see it with my own eyes. Captain, take over 
command during my absence. Send out immediately a transmission to Colonel Pangratt...' 
'Colonel Abatemarco, is it reasonable for you to personally...' 
'That's an order!' 
'As you command!' 
'This is a gamble, Colonel,' the commander of the scouts shouted over the thunder of 
hooves. 'We could run into a company of elven scouts.' 
'Don't talk! Lead!' 

They galloped through a valley, past a stream and then turned into some woods. They had 
to slow down as their riding was hindered by the undergrowth; also there was the threat of 
running into one of the Nilfgaardian reconnaissance patrols. Even though the condottieri 
scout approached from the flank of the enemy, not from the front, there was still a good 
chance the flank was protected. The actions they took were risky as hell. But Pretty Kitty was 
known for such frivolous things. And there was not in the whole of the Free Company any 
soldier who wouldn't have followed her – even to hell. 
'It's here,' said the commander of the scouts. 'This is the tower.' 
Julia Abatemarco shook her head. The tower was twisted, ruined, bristling with broken 
beams and a patchwork of holes that the west wind blew through whistling like a bagpipe. No 
one had any idea who or why the tower had been built in this secluded spot. But it was known 
that it had been built a long time ago. 
'It will not collapse?' 
'Certainly not, Colonel.' 
Among the Free Company, the condottieri did not use 'sir' or 'ma'am'. Only rank. 
Julia swiftly climbed to the top of the tower. The commander of the scouts joined her 
after some time, panting like a bull covering a cow. Pretty Kitty stood on the tilted 
battlements and watched the horizon through a spyglass, while putting her tongue between 
her teeth and sticking out her bottom. At the sight, the commander of the scouts felt a slight 
thrill. However, for his own safety, he quickly mastered it. 
'On my soul, Ard Feainn,' Julia Abatemarco licked her lips. 'I can see the Seventh 
Daerlan, the elves of the Vrihedd Brigade our friends from Maribor and Mayena... Aha! 
There are also the skullheads, the famous Nauzicaa Brigade... I can also see the flames of the 
armoured Deithwen Division... And the white banner with the black Alerion of the Alba 
Division.' 
'You recognized them,' muttered the commander, 'like old acquaintances... How do you 
know them?' 
'I graduated from the military academy,' said Pretty Kitty carelessly, as if it was nothing. 
'I am a career officer. Well, I saw what I wanted to see. Let's go back to the banner.' 
 
*** 
 
'He has brought against us the Fourth Cavalry Army and the Third,' Julia Abatemarco 
said. 'I repeat, the whole of the Fourth Cavalry and the Third Army. Behind the vanguard I 
saw dust clouds reaching up to the sky. In those three columns, I estimate about forty 
thousand horses, maybe more. Maybe...' 
'Maybe Coehoorn divided his Center Group Army,' finished Adam "Adieu" Pangratt, 
chosen to be the supreme commander of the Free Company. 'Maybe he took only his Fourth 
Cavalry and the horses from the Third and no infantry so he could proceed as quickly as 
possible... Ha, you know what I'd do if I were coming up against King Foltest's constable 
Natalis...' 
'I know,' Pretty Kitty's eyes flashed with amusement. 'I know what you'd do, you'd send 
runners.' 
'Of course.' 
'Natalis is a cunning fox. Maybe tomorrow...' 
'Maybe,' Adieu said again. 'I guess he thinks like me. Come with me, Julia, I want to 
show you something.' 
They moved ahead of the rest of the army. The sun was almost touching the hills to the 
west, the forest and grassland darkened and the valley was filled with a long shadow. 

However, it was still light enough for Pretty Kitty to immediately notice what Pangratt 
wanted to show her. 
'Here,' Adieu said, confirming her guess. 'If I was the commander of our forces, this is 
where I would pose the battle tomorrow.' 
'It is good terrain,' Julia admitted. 'Hard, straight and plain... We could marshal the 
forces there... on those plains. And that hill is an idea command post.' 
'You're right. Look right in the middle of the valley, there is a lake and we can use that 
tactically as well, with the river, although they are shallow, they have marshy shores... What 
was the river called, Julia? The one we passed through yesterday. Do you remember?' 
'I forgot. The Scoop, I guess. Or something like that.' 
 
*** 
 
"Those who are familiar with the local surroundings can easily imagine the situation 
better than someone who has to rely solely on cartography to find the settlement of Brenna. It 
was to this settlement that the royal army arrived, in truth there was no settlement because 
during a battle the year before, Elven commandos burned it to the ground. It was there on the 
left flank that the Redanian contingent, commanded by Count de Ruyter took a position. He 
had eight thousand men, infantry and cavalry. 
The center of the army was located under the hill, which was later called Gallows Hill. 
On this high ground stood King Foltest's constable, John Natalis which gave him a perfect 
view of the battlefield. Below him were grouped the main strength of our troops – twelve 
thousand Temerian and Redanian infantry formed into four square units, beyond which were 
arrayed ten banners of heavy cavalry. In reserve were three thousand Maribor infantry under 
the command of Voivode Bronibor. 
From the southern shore of the lake, which the local residence called Gold, which 
meandered down to the Cholta, were deployed the units of our right flank – The Volunteer 
Army of Mahakam dwarves, eight squadrons of light cavalry and factions of the great 
condottieri, the Free Company. The right flank was under the command of Adam Pangratt 
and the dwarf Barclay Els. 
At a distance of nearly two miles across from the royal army, the army of Nilfgaard was 
mobilized under the command of Field Marshal Menno Coehoorn. It's armed populous stood 
like an iron wall, regiment after regiment, company after company, squadron after squadron, 
as far as the eye could see. And through the forest of banners and halberds you could see that 
their position was not only wide, but also deep. 
Their army was about forty-six thousand strong at that time, however, only a few people 
knew this. Which was fortunate, because the determination of many of our soldiers did not 
waver at the sight of the immense power of Nilfgaard. 
But even the most bold of heart had theirs pounding faster under their armour, because it 
was obvious that a difficult and bloody battle was about to begin here soon and that many of 
those lined up here would not see the sunset." 
 
Jarre pushed up his glasses, which had slipped down onto his nose, and re-read through 
the entire piece of text again, sighed, rubbed his bald head and erased the last sentence. 
The wind whispered through the linden trees and bees buzzed. Children, as children do, 
tried to out shout one another. 
A ball bounced off of a wall and stooped at the feet of the old man. Before he could 
awkwardly reach down, one of his grandsons passed him and grabbed the ball while running. 
As he passed he banged the table. Jarre, with his right hand, saved the inkwell from falling, 
and with the stump of his left hand held the ream of paper. 

Bees, yellow and heavy with pollen from the linden trees, buzzed loudly overhead. 
Jarre resumed writing. 
 
"The morning was cloudy, but the sun pierced the clouds to explicitly remind us of the 
passing hours. The wind picked up, the flags and banners fluttered like a flock of birds rising 
to depart. Before us the Nilfgaardians were still, and all began to wonder why Field Marshal 
Menno Coehoorn did not give the order to attack..." 
 
*** 
 
'When?' Menno Coehoorn looked up from his map and planted his eyes on his 
commanders. 'You want to know when I'll give the order to attack?' 
No one answered. Menno watched his officers. Those who seemed the most tense and 
nervous where those who had to stay in the reserve. Elan Trahe, commander of the Seventh 
Daerlan and Kees van Lo of the Nauzicca brigade. Clearly nervous too was Ouder de 
Wyngalt, the aide-de-camp of Field Marshal Coehoorn, who had not even come close to a 
battle field. 
But those who personally commanded battle actions looked calm, even bored. Marcus 
Braibant yawned, Rhetz de Mellis-Stoke was picking at his ear with his little finger, Colonel 
Ramon Tyrconnel, the young commander of the Ard Feainn division softly whistled while his 
eyes wandered over the distant horizon. Another of the promising young officers, Colonel 
Liam aep Muir Moss of the Deithwen division flicked through a pocket volume of his 
favourite verses. The commander of the Alba division of Lancers, Tobor Eggebracht was 
scratching at his collar with the handle of a riding whip like a coachman. 
'The attack will start,' Coehoorn said, 'when the reconnaissance patrols return. I'm 
worried about the hills to the north. Before we strike, gentlemen, I must know who or what is 
behind them.' 
 
*** 
 
Lamarr Flaut was terribly afraid. Fear gripped his bowels, and it seemed to him that his 
intestines where coat with slimy eels that were doggedly searching for a way to get to 
freedom. An hour earlier, the patrol had received orders which had been put into motion. 
Flaut, in the depth of his mind, was hoping that the fear would be drowned out by the cold 
morning and routine, a ritual that he had exercised a hundred times, harsh, serve and military 
ceremonial. He was wrong. Now, after an hour and travelling about five miles, deep into the 
dangerous enemy territory, the fear still gnawed at him. 
The patrol stopped on the hillside below the fir forest. The riders were carefully 
concealed in a growth of tall junipers. Before them stretched a wide valley. Fog spun around 
the top of the grass. 
'Nobody,' said Flaut. 'Not a soul. Let's go back. We've travelled too far.' 
The sergeant looked at him in askance. Far? They had barely gone a few miles and moved 
like lame turtles. 
'We should,' he said, 'go out there to the opposite hill, Lieutenant. We will have a better 
view. Especially of both valleys. From there we can see if anyone is in the other valley. What 
do you think, sir? It is only a few yards.' 
A few yards, Flaut thought. In open terrain, which is as flat as a pan. The eels writhed 
and sought a way out of his guts. Flaut felt that at least one of them was on the right track. 
I heard the jingle of spurs. A horse snorting. There, among those pines, on that sandy 
slope. Is something moving there? A silhouette? Are we being surrounded? 

A rumour ran through the camp a few days ago that the condottieri Free Company had 
caught in an ambush a party from the Vrihedd brigade and managed to capture an elf alive. It 
was said that he had been castrated; his tongue had been torn out, all of his fingers cut off of 
his hand... And finally they put out his eyes. 
Then they joked, saying he would not be able to have fun with his elven whores. And he 
wouldn't be able to watch others having fun. 
'Well, sir?' the sergeant spoke hoarsely. 'Do we approach the hill?' 
Lamarr Flaut swallowed. 
'No,' he said. 'Let's not waste time. We have found nothing; there are no enemies here. 
We have to go back and give our report to the commander. Let's go back!' 
 
*** 
 
Menno Coehoorn listened to the report and raised his head from the map. 
'To the banners,' he ordered shortly. 'Mister Braibant, Mister Mellis-Stoke. Attack!' 
'Long live the Emperor!' yelled Tyrconnel and Eggebracht. Menno looked at the 
strangely. 
'To the banners,' he repeated. 'May the Great Sun shine on your glory.' 
 
*** 
 
Milo Vanderbeck, a Halfling and a field surgeon who was better known by his nickname, 
Rusty, sucked through his nostrils the familiar mix of smells of iodine, ammonia, alcohol and 
magical elixirs that floated around the tent. He wanted to savour the fragrance of this now, 
while it was still healthy, pure and clinically sterile. He knew that it would not stay this way 
for long. 
He looked at the operation table, still as white as driven snow and his instruments, the 
dozens of tools engendered respect and trust with the impassive and menacing dignity of it's 
cold steel, pristine cleanliness, order placement and aesthetics. 
Gathered around the instruments was his bustling staff – three women. No, Rusty mental 
corrected himself. A woman and two girls. No. One old, yet beautiful and young-looking 
woman. And two children. 
The sorceress and healer named Marti Sodergren. And two volunteers. Shani, a student 
from Oxenfurt. And Iola, a priestess from the Temple of Melitele in Ellander. 
Marti Sodergren I know, Rusty thought, I've already worked with this beauty, more than 
once. A little nymphomaniac, she also has a tendency towards hysteria, but so long as she 
works her magic. Her spells for anaesthetics, disinfectants and to stop haemorrhages. 
Iola, is a priestess, or rather an adept. A girl of ordinary beauty like a linen cloth and big, 
strong peasant hands. The temple prevented her hands from being stained with dirt in a silt 
field. But she could not disguise her origin. No, Rusty thought, in principle, I have nothing to 
fear from her. These hands are peasant hands, trustworthy hands. In addition, the girls at the 
temple rarely fail, and in moments of stress do not crack, but look back on their religion, in 
their mystical faith. Interestingly; it helps. 
He looked at the red-haired Shani, deftly threading curved suture needles. 
Shani. A child from the meagre neighbourhood that received her education at the 
University due to her infinite desire for knowledge and unimaginable sacrifice of poor 
parents. A student. What can she do? Threading needles? Tightening a tourniquet? Holding 
hooks? The question is whether the red-head will faint, drop the hooks and go nose first into 
the open abdomen of the patient being operated on? 

Humans are not very resilient, he thought. I asked them to give me an elf. Or someone of 
my own race. But they did not. They do not trust us. Or me, anyway. I'm a halfling. Not 
human. Alien. 
'Shani!' 
'Yes, Mister Vanderbeck?' 
'Rusty. That is, for you "Mister Rusty". What is this, Shani? What is it for?' 
'Are you examining me, Mister Rusty?' 
'Answer, girl!' 
'This is a scraper! To remove the periosteum during an amputation! In order for the 
periosteum not to burst under the serrated blade, you must saw cleanly! Are you satisfied? 
Have I gained your approval?' 
'Quiet, girl, quiet.' 
He ran his fingers through his hair. 
Interesting, He thought. Here we have four doctors. And all are redheads! Is this fate or 
what? 
'Please come out, ladies,' he nodded to his assistants, 'before the tent.' 
The obeyed. But each of the three muttered under their breath. Each in their own way. 
Before the tent sat a group of medics, enjoying the last minutes of sweat idleness. Rusty 
gave them a stern look, and sniffed to see if they were already drunk. 
The blacksmith, a muscular fellow, was busy rearranging tools on his bench that would be 
used to rescue the wounded from warped armour and helmets. 
'There,' Rusty began without preamble, pointing towards the battlefield, 'will soon begin 
a bloodbath. And right afterwards we will get our first wounded. You all know what to do, 
where your position is and what your responsibilities are. If you behave accordingly, you can 
no go wrong. Are we clear?' 
The girls listened to his speech without comment. 
'There,' Rusty pointed in the same direction as before, 'will soon begin hundreds of 
thousands of people trying to hurt and kill each other. In very sophisticated ways. In this and 
two other hospitals we have twelve doctors. There is no way in the world we'll be able to 
help all those in need. Not even a fraction of those in need. And to tell you the truth, no one 
even expects that from us. But we will treat them. Because it is, sorry for the cliché, the 
reason for our existence. To those who need us.' 
His listeners remained silent. Rusty shrugged. 
'We cannot do more than we can,' he said quieter and warmer. 'But we will do our all, 
we can do no less than that.' 
 
*** 
 
'They're charging,' Constable John Natalis said while wiping his sweaty palms on his 
pants. 'The Nilfgaardians are charging, Your Majesty, they are coming for us!' 
King Foltest, mastered his dancing horse, a white horse decorated with lilies on his saddle 
and turned his noble profile, worthy of decorating coins towards the constable. 
'We must prepare an appropriate welcome, Lord Constable! Officers!' 
'Death to the Black ones!' yelled the condottiere Adam "Adieu" Pangratt and Count de 
Ruyter. The Constable straightened in his saddle and took a deep breath. 
'To the banners!' 
Drums reverberated, cymbals crashed and horns sounded. The earth trembled under the 
tens of thousands of hooves. 
 
*** 

 
'Now,' said the Halfling, Andy Biberveldt brushing the hair from his pointy ears. 'It 
begins...' 
Tara Hildebrandt, Didi Hofmeier and the others who were gathered around the wagons 
nodded. They could hear the dull, monotonous thud of hooves coming from behind the hill 
and forest. They could feel the ground shaking. 
Then, beyond the forest arose cries. And the noise intensified. 
'The first volley from the archers,' said Andy expertly who had already seen – or rather 
heard – many battles. 'There will be another one.' 
He was right. 
'Now they'll collide.' 
'Ma...ma..maybe we could... hide... under the... wagon,' William Hardbottom proposed, 
stuttering and writhing uneasily. 
Biberveldt and the others looked at the Halfling with pity. 
'Under? The wagons? What for? We are separated from the battle by nearly a quarter of a 
mile. And even if a patrol came here to the rear, hiding under the wagon would not save our 
lives.' 
The noise from the fighting intensified. 
'Now,' Andy Biberveldt estimated and was right again. From a distance of a quarter of a 
mile through the forest came the sound of the royal army colliding with iron and a horrible 
sound that bristled the hair. 
Terrible, desperate, wild squeals and whinnies from animals being mutilated. 
'The cavalry...' Biberveldt licked his lips. 'The cavalry impaled on pikes...' 
 
*** 
 
The old chronicler used the sponge and erased the next sentence, with whose wording he 
was not satisfied. He closed his eyes, reminding himself of that day. The moment when the 
two armies collided. Where both armies, as fierce as mastiffs, jumped at each other's throats, 
tightening in a deadly embrace. 
Jarre looked for the words with which to describe it. 
In vain. 
 
*** 
 
A wedge was driven into the side of the Temerian infantry. A gargantuan live ram of the 
Alba division, crushing everything that protected the living bodies of the infantry – pikes, 
spears, shields and halberds. 
The Alba division struck like a dagger into a living body and shed blood. Horses slipped 
on the blood slicked ground. But although the tip of the dagger penetrated very deep, it did 
not hit the heart or any vital organs. The wedge of the Alba division instead of crushing and 
dismembering the Temerian infantry, dug in and got stuck. They remained stuck in the mass 
of infantry, thick and viscous like pitch. 
At first it did not seem so threatening. The head and wings of the wedge were made up of 
elite troops in heavy armour, from their shields and armour, blows bounced off like a 
blacksmith's hammer off of an anvil, they had also chosen well protected mounts. And 
although every now and again one of the armoured troops fell and the horse with him, their 
swords and axes fell among the infantrymen in a bloody harvest. Surrounded by a mob, the 
division began to penetrate deeper. 

'Albaaa!' Junior Lieutenant Devlin aep Meara heard the battle cry of Colonel Eggebracht, 
rising above the clatter of weapons and the roar of men and the neighing of horses. 'Forward 
Alba! For the Emperor!' 
They moved forward, chopping, pounding and thrusting. Under the reluctant horses 
hooves could be heard sloshing, cracking and wailing. 
'Albaaa!' 
The wedge became stuck again. The landsknechts although crushed and bleeding, did not 
yield and surrounded the cavalry like a vice. The earth trembled. Under the bludgeoning of 
the halberds and the flails, the first line of the wedge fell apart. Riddled with halberds and 
clubs, torn from their mounts by hooks, the knights of the Alba division began to die. 
The dagger stuck in the Temerian infantry, was now not so much crippling iron in a living 
organism but was now like an icicle in the grip of a peasant. 
'Temeriaaa! For the King! Kill the Black ones!' 
It was not easy for the landsknechts. The Alba division did not burst apart. Swords and 
axes rose and feel and for every fallen rider the fierce infantry paid the price in blood. 
The tip of a spear found its way into the crack n the armour of Eggebracht and thrust into 
it. The Colonel cried and swayed in his saddle. Before his men could help him, the combat 
swept him to the ground and the infantry fell upon him. 
The black banner with the Alerion wobbled and fell. Heavy cavalry, among them Junior 
Lieutenant Delvin aep Meara, rushed in that direction, chopping, slashing, trampling and 
yelling. 
I wonder, thought Devlin aep Meara, removing his sword from the shattered skull of a 
Temerian landsknecht. I wonder, he thought deflecting a blow aimed at him, what is the point 
of all this? And who is to blame? 
 
*** 
 
'Uh... And then the Great Masters gathered at... Our Venerable Mother... uh... Whose 
memory will always live within us... For the... Er... great champions of the First Lodge of... 
consulted... and decided...' 
'You did not prepare, adept Abonde. You have failed. Go sit down.' 
'But I learned it. Really...' 
'Sit down.' 
'Why do they have to teach that old nonsense,' Abonde muttered, sitting down. 'Who 
cares about it today... And what is the use...' 
'Silence! Adept Nimue!' 
'Present, Mistress.' 
'Can you answer the questions? If not, sit straight and do not waste my time.' 
'I can.' 
'Well, I'm listening.' 
'So it stands in the annals that the convent of masters took place at the Castle of Bald 
Mountain and there they agree to end the destructive war between the Emperor and the Kings 
of the North. Reverend Mother Assire, the holy martyr, decided that the rulers would not stop 
fighting until completely exhausted. Whereupon, Reverend Mother Philippa, the holy martyr 
decided, "Let's give them an unimaginably horrible, cruel and bloody battle, a battle that will 
be unprecedented. That the imperial armies and troops of the kings will be swimming in the 
blood of that battle, and then, we, the Grand Lodge will force them to make peace". And that 
is exactly what happened. The Reverend Mothers created the Battle of Brenna. And then the 
rulers were force to sign for peace at Cintra.' 

'Well done, adept Nimue. I'd give you an A... if not for the word "so" at the beginning of 
the speech. Do not start a sentence with "so". Sit down. And now we will talk about the 
Peace of Cintra...' 
The bell rang for recess. But the adepts did not react with the immediate snap and clatter 
of desks. They kept their calm and dignity, a distinguished tranquillity. 
They were not snotty first years. They were third years. They were already fourteen. And 
that was important. 
 
*** 
 
'This is the only possible solution,' Rusty assessed the status of the first of the wounded, 
who was covering the clean operation table with blood. 'The thigh bone is crushed. The 
artery has not been cut, otherwise it would have been a corpse brought here. It looks like an 
axe blow, with which the saddle served as a wooden block. You can look for yourselves...' 
Iola and Shani bent over the wounded soldier, Rusty rubbed his palms together. 
'As I said, there is nothing to heal here; we will just have to cut. To work. Iola, a 
tourniquet. Tighten it harder. Shani, a scalpel. Not that one. The larger one for amputation.' 
The wounded man kept shooting terrified glances at their hands, watching their actions 
through the eyes of an animal caught in a trap. 
'A little magic, Marti, if you please,' The Halfling bent over the patient so as to minimize 
his field of vision. 
'I have to amputate son.' 
'Noooo!' the wounded man said, thrashing his head, trying to escape Marti Sodergren's 
hands. 'I don't want you to!' 
'I have to amputate or you will die.' 
'I'd rather die...' The wounded man's movements were getting slower under the influence 
of the healing magic. 'I'd rather die than be maimed... Let me die... I beg you... Let me die!' 
'I cannot,' Rusty raised the scalpel and looked at the bright blade of immaculate steel. 'I 
cannot let you die. I am a doctor.' 
He strongly pressed the blade into the skin and cut deeply. The wounded man howled. 
The sound was inhuman. 
 
*** 
 
The messenger stopped the horse so suddenly that sparks emerged from under the hooves. 
Two assistants seized the halter and calmed the frothy stallion. The messenger dropped to the 
ground. 
'Who are you?' John Natalis said. 'Who sent you?' 
'Lord de Ruyter...' wheezed the messenger. 'We have stopped the Black ones, but we 
have suffered terrible losses. Lord de Ruyter is asking for reinforcements.' 
'No,' the Constable replied after a moment of silence. 'You'll have to endure. You have 
to!' 
 
*** 
 
'Look here,' Rusty said pointing like a collector who was showing his collection. 'Kindly 
look at the resulting cut from a blow to the abdomen. Someone has beat us to it and made this 
unfortunate amateur laparotomy. Good thing he was brought here with care and has not lost 
most of the important organs... At least, I hope not.... What's wrong, Shani? Why the look on 
your face? Up until now, have you only known men from the outside?' 

'The intestines are damaged, Mister Rusty...' 
'A diagnosis as accurate as evident! I don't even have to look, just smell. A handkerchief, 
Iola. Marti, there is still too much blood, be so kind as to give us some of the priceless magic 
of yours. Shani, clamp here, you can see how much he is bleeding. Iola, scalpel.' 
'Who wins?' the soldier was quite awake, his eyes bulging. 'Tell me... Who wins?' 
'Boy,' Rusty said hunch over the open, bloody, pulsating abdominal cavity. 'That is the 
last thing I'd be interested in if I was in your place.' 
 
*** 
 
On the left flank and in the center a fierce fight still lasted, but even though the 
Nilfgaardian army was hard and persistent, they broke upon the King's army like a sea wave 
breaks against the rocks. For there stood the brave soldiers from Maribor, Vizima and 
Tretogor and the grim landsknechts, the mercenary professionals, the cavalry did not scare. 
And there they fought, truly like the sea against the rocks and continued to fight, and it 
was not possible to guess who would win, because even though the waves beat against the 
rock, it did not weaken or disappear and it stood there between the raging waves. 
Like an old hawk, who knows where to fall and attack, so Field Marshal Menno 
Coehoorn knew where to strike. With the iron fist of his army, which consisted of the 
Deithwen division and Ard Feainn division he struck at the enemy lines above Golden Pond. 
That place was fiercely defended by the troops from Brugge, but they were less armed and 
armoured and morale was low. They managed to hold off the attack of the Nilfgaardians. In a 
breath of relief two flags of the Free Company under the command of Adam Pangratt 
arrested the Nilfgaardians, but both sides paid dearly in blood. 
However, the dwarves of the Volunteer brigade were facing a terrible siege and the threat 
of encirclement, which would threaten to tear apart the formation of the royal army. 
Jarre dipped his pen into the inkwell. His grandchildren played in the yard, their laughter 
ringing like bells. 
Seeing the danger threatening, however, John Natalis, attentive as a crane, understood 
what was happening at the time, and without waiting he sent a messenger with orders to 
Colonel Els... 
 
*** 
 
In all the naivety of his seventeen years, the trumpeter, Aubry, thought that he could get 
down to the right wing, transmit his orders and be back up the hill in no more than ten 
minutes. Absolutely no more! Not on Chiquita, his light foot mare. 
Even before he reached the Golden Pond, the trumpeter realised two things – He didn't 
know when he would reach the right wing and he didn't know when he would get back. And 
that Chiquita's agility would be very useful to him. 
At the east end of Golden Pond, fighting raged. The Black one's fought against Brugge's 
cavalry which was protecting the infantry. Before the eyes of the trumpeter from the heat of 
the battle rode individual riders in green, yellow and red robes who fled at a gallop towards 
the river. Behind them like a black river, spilled the Nilfgaardians. 
Aubry jerked the reins, stopping his mare, ready to turn her and flee out of the way of the 
fugitives and pursuers. But his sense of duty prevailed. The trumpeter clung to the horse's 
neck and went into a wild gallop. 
Around him was shouting and confusion, a kaleidoscopic jumble of silhouettes, the glitter 
of swords, crashes and rattles. 

Some of the men from Brugge where backed up to the pond and put up a desperate fight, 
milling about their flags with a crossed anchor. On the field the Black ones murdered the 
infantry who were devoid of support. 
Before his eyes swirled a black cloak with a silver sun on it. 
'Evgyr, Nordling!' 
Aubry yelled and Chiquita excited by the howling, took off at a gallop, saving his life by 
putting it out of reach of the Nilfgaardian's sword. Above his head arrows whistled and 
flashed around the blurring silhouettes. 
Where am I? Where are ours? Where is the enemy? 
'Evgyr morv, Nordling!' 
The thunder of hooves, neighing of horses, banging of weapons, shouting. 
'Stop, you little shit! Not that way!' 
A woman's voice. A woman on a chestnut stallion, in armour, her hair dishevelled and 
her face splattered with blood. Behind her were armed horsemen. 
'Who are you?' she said, smearing the blood on her face with the back of her hand which 
held a sword. 
'Trumpeter Aubry, Second Lieutenant to Constable Natalis... with orders for Colonels 
Pangratt and Els...' 
'There is no way you'll get to "Adieu" through the fighting. We'll go to the dwarves. I'm 
Julia Abatemarco... Fuck! They're flanking us! Ride!' 
He did not have time to protest. Similarly, it would not have made sense. 
After a while of furious galloping, they emerged from the dust in front of the infantry 
square who were defending themselves like a turtle with a wall of shields and like the skin of 
a hedgehog covered with spears. Over the square loomed a huge banner with crossed 
hammers and next to it was a pole with skulls and horsetails. 
The square who were moving and jumping around like a dog escaping from an old man 
waving a stick, were being attacked by the Nilfgaardians. The Ard Feainn division who 
thanks to their coats with the silver sun on them could not be mistaken for any other. 
'Strike, Free Company!' screamed the woman, raising her sword. 'Make them pay!' 
The riders – and with the Aubry – charged the Nilfgaardians. 
The battle only took a few moments. But it was horrible. 
Then the wall of shields opened before them. They were inside the square, in a crushing 
ring of dwarves in mail shirts and helmets, among the Redanian infantry, the cavalry of the 
Brugge and the light armoured condottiere. 
Julia Abatemarco – Pretty Kitty, Commander of the condottiere – who Aubry only now 
recognised – led him to a stocky dwarf in a helmet decorated with a red plume, sitting on a 
captured Nilfgaardian stallion, with a high saddle, with which he could see over the head of 
his soldiers. 
'Colonel Barclay Els?' 
The dwarf nodded his plume and looked at the blood that covered the messenger and his 
mare. Aubry involuntarily blushed. It was the blood of a Nilfgaardian who one of the 
condottiere had cut down right next to him. He did not even draw his sword. 
'Trumpeter Aubry...' 
'Son of Anzelm Aubry?' 
'The eldest.' 
'Ha! I know your father! What have you got for me from Natalis and Foltest, trumpeter?' 
'The center formation is in the threat of a breakthrough, the Constable commands you to 
move your men between Golden Pond and the bank of the Cholta... To support...' 
His next words were drowned out by an incredible din of shouting and neighing horses. 
Aubry realised how useless the orders he had brought were. How much these orders meant to 

Barclay Els, to Julia Abatemarco, to the dwarves with the banner with the crossed hammers, 
who were besieged from all side by Nilfgaard. 
'I was delayed...' he wailed. 'I've arrived too late.' 
Pretty Kitty sputtered like a real cat. Barclay Els gritted his teeth. 
'No, trumpeter,' he said. 'Nilfgaard has arrived too early.' 
 
*** 
 
'Congratulations ladies and myself, for a successful resection of the small intestine, 
colon, splenectomy and liver stitching. Take note of how long it took for us to remove the 
effects of what had been done to our patient in a split second in battle. I would recommend 
th9is material for philosophical reflection. Sew up the patient now, Lady Shani.' 
'But I've never done it, Mister Rusty!' 
'You have to start sometime. Sew red with red, yellow with yellow and white with white. 
And everything will be all right.' 
 
*** 
 
'What did you say?' Barclay Els said yanking his beard. 'What did you say, eldest son of 
Anzelm Aubry? Do you think we are idle here? We are under attack by Nilfgaard! It is not 
our fault that the men from Brugge were attacked!' 
'But the orders...' 
'I don't give a shit about the orders!' 
'If we do not close the gap,' he shouted over the noise, 'the Black ones will break through 
the front! They will break through the front! Opening our ranks, Barclay! You must march 
there!' 
'We'll be slaughtered before we can leave the pond! We'll die for nothing!' 
'So, what do you propose?' 
The dwarf furiously cursed, took off his helmet and threw it on the ground. His eyes were 
wild, terrible and bloodshot. Chiquita, frightened by the roar, pulled at the reins. 
'Fetch me Yarpen Zigrin and Dennis Cranmer! Hurry!' 
Two dwarves waded out of the bloodiest part of the battle; it was clear at first glance. 
Both were covered in blood. The chainmail of one had a deep cut that was sheered at a sharp 
angle. The other had his head bandaged with a cloth, which was soaked in blood. 
'Are you alright, Zigrin?' 
'I wonder,' sighed the dwarf, 'why everyone is asking me that?' 
Barclay turned and fixed his eyes on the Constable's messenger. 
'This is the eldest son of Anzelm. The Constable and the King have commanded that we 
go to the front to help them. Make sure you keep your eyes open, trumpeter. There will be 
something to look at.' 
 
*** 
 
'The plague!' cursed Rusty, backing away from the table waving his scalpel. 'Why? 
Damn it! Why must it be so?' 
No one answered. Marti Sodergren only spread her hands. Shani bowed her head and Iola 
sniffed. 
The patient who had just died, stared upwards, his eyes were fixed and glassy. 
 
*** 

 
'Strike, Kill! Kill these motherfuckers!' 
'At the same pace!' Barclay Els shouted. 'Walk the same way! Keep the ranks tight! Stay 
as a group! A group!' 
No one is going to believe me, thought the trumpeter Aubry. When I tell people about this, 
no one will believe me. The square is breaking out of a full siege... Surrounded on all sides by 
cavalry, torn, beaten and harassed... And this square progresses. Advancing at the same 
pace, in close formation, shield to shield. Advancing, treading on corpses, pushing 
themselves against the elite Ard Feainn division... They were advancing. 
'Keep pace! Walk the same way!' Barclay Els shouted again. 'Hold the ranks! The song, 
you whoresons, the song! Our song! Forward, for Mahakam!' 
From the throats of a thousand dwarves came the famous Mahakam song of war. 
 
Hooouuu! Hooouuu! Hou 
Wait, fellows! 
Soon you will go to hell! 
This whorehouse will crumble 
To its foundations! 
Hooouuu! Hooouuu! Hou 
 
'Strike, Free Company!' Between the huge roar of the dwarves, like a thin blade of 
mercy, emerged the acute soprano of Julia Abatemarco. The condottieri left the square and 
made a counterattack on the Nilfgaardian cavalry. It was a suicide action – for the 
mercenaries, lacking the protection of the halberds, pikes and shields of the dwarves were 
exposed to the power of the Nilfgaardians attack. The pounding, yelling and the squealing of 
horses made the trumpeter, Aubry, instinctively curl up in his saddle. Something struck him 
in the back. He felt his mare become caught in the general crush and was inexorably dragged 
into the terrible carnage and confusion. He firmly grasped the hilt of his sword, which 
suddenly seemed to him to be strangely slippery and cumbersome. 
 After a moment he was driven across the line of shields and started to chop and fight 
around him like a man possessed. 
'Again!' he heeded the wild cry of Pretty Kitty. 'One more strike! Hold on, boys! Kill, 
kill! For coins as golden as the sun! To me, Free Company!' 
A Nilfgaardian rider without a helmet and with the silver sun on his cloak broke in 
through the shields, standing in his stirrups, he hacked his axe into the dwarf who was not 
protected by a shield, he then opened the head of another. Aubry turned in his saddle and cut 
horizontally. The Nilfgaardian's head fell to the ground. At the same time the trumpeter 
received a blow to the head and fell from the saddle. The crowd of people around him 
prevented his immediate fall to the ground and for a few moments he hung between heaven 
and earth between the sides of two horses. Although he was full of fear, he was not in pain 
for long. As soon as he hit the ground, his skull was immediately crushed by hooves. 
 
*** 
 
After sixty-five years, when asked about those days, about the Battle of Brenna, about the 
square marching over corpses of friends and foes, advancing towards Golden Pond, the old 
woman smiled, further wrinkling her face, which was already wrinkled and dark as a prune. 
Impatiently – or maybe just pretending impatience, she waved her trembling, bony hand 
which was twisted with arthritis. 

'Neither side,' she lisped, 'could gain an advantage. We were in the middle and 
surrounded. They attacked us from all sides. We simply killed. They, us and we them... khe-
khe-khh... They us and we them...' 
The old woman controlled her coughing with effort. The listeners who were closest saw 
her wipe away a tear that was making its way through her maze of wrinkles and old scars. 
'They were as brave as us,' she muttered. 'Khe-khe... And we were just as strong and 
stubborn and fierce as they. Us and them...' 
She paused. For a long time. The listeners urged her, watching her smile at the memories, 
with its glory. Smiling at the blurred faces of those who survived through the fog of 
forgetfulness. Those that could not been killed by liquor, narcotics or tuberculosis. 
'We were equally brave,' end Julia Abatemarco. 'Neither side was strong enough to be 
braver. But we... We remained braver one minute more than they.' 
 
*** 
 
'Marti, I beg you, give us more of your wonderful magic! Just a little bit more! These 
fellows gut is unfortunately one big stew, garnished with lots of chain mail rings! I cannot do 
anything if he keeps flopping around like a fish out of water! Shani, damn it, hold the clamp! 
Iola! Are you asleep, dammit? Tighten! Squeeezze!' 
Iola, breathing heavily, swallowed saliva with effort. I'm going to faint, she thought. I 
can't stand it. I can't bear it any longer, the smell, the awful mixture of blood, puke, faeces, 
urine, intestinal contents, sweat, fear and death. I cannot endure it any longer, the constant 
crying, the howling, the bloody, slimy hands reaching towards me, as if I was their salvation, 
their refuge, their lives... I cannot stand the nonsense, what we are doing here. Because it is 
nonsense. On big, huge, meaningless nonsense. I cannot stand any more strain and fatigue. 
They continue to deliver more and more... I cannot stand it. I cannot stand it. I'm going to 
throw up. To faint. I will be ridiculed... 
'Bandage! Swab! Clamp! Not here! Be careful what you're doing! If you make another 
mistake, I'll smack you on your red head! Do you hear? I'll smack you on the head!' 
Great Melitele help me. Help me, goddess. 
'Look! He is improving! Another clamp, Priestess. Here, clamp the vessel! Well done, 
Iola, keep it up! Marti, wipe your eyes and face. And me too...' 
 
*** 
 
Where does this pain come from, thought Constable John Natalis. What hurts me so 
much? 
Oh. 
He unclenched his fists. 
 
*** 
 
'Strike!' cried Kees van Lo, waving his hands. 'Strike, Lord Marshal! Their line permits! 
If we do not hesitate to strike, we can break them! The Great Sun will crush them!' 
Menno Coehoorn bit his nails. He noticed that there were people watching him and 
quickly pulled his fingers out of his mouth. 
'Strike,' Kees van Lo repeated calmly. 'Nauzicaa is ready.' 
'Nauzicaa must be,' Menno said brusquely. 'Daerlan also needs to be. Lord Faoiltiarna!' 

The commander of the Vrihedd brigade, Isengrim Faoiltiarna, call the "Iron Wolf", turned 
to the marshal his face was distorted by a terrible scar that extended across his forehead, 
brow, the bridge of his nose and to his cheek. 
'You will strike there,' Menno Coehoorn pointed his baton. 'There, where the Temerian 
and Redanian lines come together. Right there.' 
The elf saluted. His disfigured face did not move, even his great deep eyes did not change 
expression. 
Our allies, thought Menno. Our allies. We have fought together. Against a common 
enemy. But I do not understand these elves at all. They are so strange. So different. 
 
*** 
 
'Curious,' Rusty tried to wipe his face with his elbow, but his elbow was also bloody. Iola 
hurried to his aid. 'Interesting,' said the surgeon, 'the patient was stabbed with a pitchfork... 
one of the teeth pierced his heart, oh, look here. The cardiac chamber is breached, the aorta is 
almost separated... But he was still breathing a little while ago. Here, on the table. On the 
battlefield he was pierced through the heart and he lived still on my table...' 
'You mean he died?' said a grim member of the cavalry. 'We were carrying him here in 
vain?' 
'It is never in vain,' Rusty held his gaze. 'But you are right, he has died. The patient has 
died. Take him away... damn! Come take a look girls!' 
Marti, Iola and Shani bowed over the dead soldier. Rusty lifted the eyelids of the dead 
man. 
'Have you ever seen anything like that?' 
The three began to tremble. 
'Yes,' all three answered simultaneously. They looked at each other in amazement. 
'I have already seen it,' said Rusty. 'He's a witcher. A mutant. That explains to us why he 
survived for so long... He was your comrade-in-arms? Or did you bring him here by chance?' 
'He was our companion, Sir Medic,' a second soldier, a small man with a bandage head 
said gloomily. 'From our squadron, as a volunteer. A master swordsman. His name was 
Coen.' 
'Did you know he was a witcher?' 
'We did. But he was a good friend.' 
'Ah,' Rusty sighed, looking at four soldiers bringing in another wounded in a blood-
soaked cloak. A young man judging by how thin he was. 'That's too bad... I'd like to do the 
autopsy on this respectable witcher. This would be a fine opportunity, I could even write a 
dissertation, O could take a look at his organs. But there is no time, remove him from the 
table! Shani, water. Marti, disinfectant. Iola... Hey, girl, are you crying again? What is it this 
time...' 
'Nothing, Mister Rusty. It is nothing. I will be alright.' 
 
*** 
 
'I feel lied to, cheated, robbed,' said Triss Merigold. 
Nenneke did not answer for a long time, she gazed from the terrace overlooking the 
temple's garden, where the priestesses and novices devoted themselves to the spring works. 
'You made a choice,' she said finally. 'You chose your path, Triss. Your own destiny. 
Voluntarily. This is no time to grieve.' 
'Nenneke,' the enchantress looked down. 'I cannot really tell you more that what I have 
said. Believe me and forgive me.' 

'Who am I to forgive? What benefits will you receive from my forgiveness?' 
'I can see,' Triss burst out, 'your eyes looking at me! You and your priestesses. I can see 
their eyes asking me the question. What are you doing here, sorceress? Why are you not there 
with Iola, Eurneid, Katje, Myrrha? Jarre?' 
'You're exaggerating, Triss.' 
The sorceress stared into the distance, into the woods beyond the temple's walls, to the 
distant smoke of fires. Nenneke was silent, thinking, she too was far away. Where the war 
was raging and bloody. She thought of the girls sent there. 
'They,' Triss said, 'refused me.' 
Nenneke was silent. 
'They refused me everything, 'Triss repeated. 'So clever, so reasonable, so logical... How 
could I not believe them when they explained that there are important and less important 
issues, and those that are less important should be given up without a second thought, to 
sacrifice them for the more important without a shadow of grief? That is does not make sense 
to save people that you know and love, because they are just individuals and the fate of these 
individuals are irrelevant to the fate of the world. That there is no sense for the struggle in 
defence of honour and ideals, for they are empty concepts? That the real battle for the fate of 
the world is somewhere else, and will be fought somewhere else? And I feel robbed. Robbed 
of the possibility of committing follies. I cannot go madly hurrying after Ciri to help her, I 
cannot run like crazy to save Geralt and Yennefer. Not only that, there is a war, which you 
have sent your girls... A war, that Jarre fled to and I am refused the possibility to even stand 
on a hill. To once again stand on a hill. Knowing this time, I'd made the right decision.' 
'Everyone has their decisions and everyone has their hills, Triss,' the priestess said 
quietly. 'Everyone. You cannot escape your own.' 
 
*** 
 
The entrance to the tent was busy. They brought another wounded soldier. Accompanied 
by several men. One of them, a knight in full plate armour, was shouting orders. 
'Hurry up, you damn slackers! Faster! Put him here, here! Hey you! Surgeon!' 
'I'm busy,' Rusty did not even look up. 'Please put him with the other wounded on the 
stretchers. I'll deal with him as soon as I'm done.' 
'You'll take care of him immediately, you fucking quack! This is the noble Count of 
Garramone himself!' 
'This hospital,' Rusty raised his voice, angry because stuck in the bowels of a wounded 
man was the broken tip of a crossbow bolt which had slipped out of his tweezers, 'has very 
little to do with democracy. You bring up mainly, barons, counts, marquises and earls. The 
ordinary wounded on the battlefield, nobody cares about. But everyone is equal here. At least 
on my table.' 
'What?' 
'Never mind,' Rusty said, again probing the wound with his tweezers, 'it doesn't matter if 
I was dragging a piece of metal from a serf or an aristocrat. All who lie on my table are equal 
to a beggar prince.' 
'What?' 
'Your Count must wait his turn.' 
'Halfling fuck!' 
'Help me, Shani. Take the other clamp. Beware of the artery! Marti, a little bit of magic, 
if I may ask. We have a bleeder.' 
The knight took a step forward, his armour and teeth gnashing. 
'I'll have you hanged!' he shouted. 'You'll hang, cursed non-human!' 

'Shut up, Papperbrock,' said the slightly wounded nobleman. 'Shut up, leave me here and 
get back to the fight.' 
'But, my lord! I cannot...' 
'That's an order!' 
From the other side of the canvas came the roar and rattle of battle, the snorting of horses 
and wild cries. The wounded in the hospital howled in different voices. 
'Please take a look,' Rusty raised the tweezers and demonstrated as he finally removed 
the tip. 'This was undoubtedly manufactured by a clever craftsman, to feed a large family. It 
shows amazing skill and dexterity. The way this gizmo sticks in the human intestines is 
ingenious. Love live progress.' 
He threw the bloody tip into a bucket and looked at the operating table, the wounded man 
had fainted dead away during his oration. 
'Sew him up and take him away,' he nodded. 'If he is lucky, he'll live. Bring me the next 
one in the queue. The one with the smashed head.' 
'He,' Marti Sodergren said calmly, 'has just released his place in line.' 
Rusty took a deep breath, without unnecessary comment walked away from the table and 
stood by the hurt Earl. His hands and apron were splattered with blood like a butcher. Daniel 
Etcheverry, Count of Garramone, paled even more. 
'Well,' said Rusty. 'It's your turn Count. Lift him up onto the table. What have we here? 
Oh, this joint can no longer be saved, it is broken. If left it will grind your bones to mush. 
Now this will hurt, but don't worry, it will be like in battle. Tourniquet, scalpel, saw. We will 
amputate, my lord.' 
Daniel Etcheverry, Earl of Garramone, who until now had bravely endured the pain, 
howled like a wolf. Before he could again clench his jaw, Shani, moving fast, thrust a piece 
of soft wood between his teeth. 
 
*** 
 
'Your Majesty! Lord Constable!' 
'Speak up, boy.' 
'The Volunteer army and the Free Company are nearing Golden Pond... The dwarves and 
the condottieri stand firm, though with severe losses. It is said that Adam "Adieu" Pangratt is 
dead, Frontino is dead and Julia Abatemarco is dead... All the commanders. The Dorian 
banner, which were sent to help were cut down to the man...' 
'Withdrawn, Lord Constable,' Foltest said quietly but clearly. 'If you ask me, it is time to 
fight a withdrawal. Let Bronibor's men stand against the Black ones. Now! Immediately! 
Otherwise they'll break through the army's front line, penetrate and end us all.' 
John Natalis didn't answer; he watched another messenger from afar who raced towards 
them on horseback, from which foam flew. 
'Take a breath man. Take a breath and pass on the message.' 
'They broke... They broke the front... Elves, the Vrihedd brigade... Lord de Ruyter 
conveys a message to your lordships...' 
'What is it? Speak!' 
'It is time to save your lives.' 
John Natalis look up to the heavens. 
'Blenckert,' he said flatly. 'Let Blenckert arrive. Or let the night come.' 
 
*** 
 

From all sides hooves thundered around the tent, the air was filled with screams and the 
whinnies of horses. A soldier burst into the hospital followed by two orderlies. 
'Run people!' shouted the soldier. 'Save yourselves! Nilfgaard has won! Defeat! Doom!' 
'Clamp!' Rusty said dodging blood that was spurting from the broken arteries of the 
patient on his operation table. 'Clamp! Swab! Here, Shani! Marti, do something about the 
bleeding...' 
Before the tent someone screamed like an animal. The scream trailed off to a grunt. A 
horse whinnied and something fell with a clang and a boom. A crossbow bolt ripped through 
the canvas, whistling, it flew to the opposite side of the tent, luckily too high to threaten any 
of the wounded lying on litters. 
'Nilfgaard!' the soldier shouted again, in a high trembling voice. 'Surgeon! Did you not 
hear what I said! Nilfgaard has broken our lines, and are killing everyone! Run!' 
Rusty took over from Marti Sodergren, taking her needle and began to sew. The patient 
lay motionless for a long time, but was still alive – his heart was beating. It was clearly 
visible. 
'I don't want to die!' shouted one of the wounded who were conscious. The soldier 
cursed and launched himself at the exit, he suddenly fell back, screaming, splattering blood, 
and collapsed to the ground. Iola who was kneeling beside the litter, jumped back. 
Suddenly there was silence. 
This is bad, Rusty thought when he saw who was entering the tent. Elves with silver 
lightning on their cloaks. The Vrihedd brigade. The notorious Vrihedd brigade. 
'They are being treated,' said the first of the elves, tall with a narrow face and blue eyes. 
No one answered. Rusty felt his hands shake. He quickly handed the needle to Marti. He 
saw Shani turn pale as chalk. 
'What is the meaning of this?' said the elf ominously. 'Why are there so many being 
treated? The wounded should be there in the field of battle, dying of their wounds. And you 
are healing them here? It does not make sense. It appears that we have different interests.' 
He bent and drove his sword into the chest of a wounded soldier closest to the door. 
Another elf crossed to a second wounded man and put his sword through him. The third 
wounded man was conscious and tried to stop the deadly stabbing with the thickly bandaged 
stump of his right arm. 
Shani screamed shrilly. It was a sharp cry that pierced. It drowned out the heavy, inhuman 
grunt from the crippled man. Iola fell across a stretcher and used her own body to protect 
another wounded. Her face was as white as the canvas dressing. The Elf's eyes narrowed. 
'Va vort, beanna!' he snapped, 'Get off, or I'll stab you both, Dh'oine!' 
'Get out of here!' Rusty found himself with three jumps in front of Iola and stood 
between her and the elf. 'Get out of my hospital, murderers! Out there you can kill each 
other! But get out of here!' 
The elf looked down. The small, stocky halfling, trembling in fear only reach just above 
his belt. 
'Blorde Pherian,' he hissed. 'Human slave! Get out of my way!' 
'Not on your life!' the surgeon's teeth chattered, but his words were strong. 
A second elf ran forward and pushed the halfling aside with a spear. Rusty fell to his 
knees. The tall elf violent jerked Iola off of the wounded man and raised his sword. 
He froze when he saw the black cloak rolled up under the the casualty's head with the 
silver flames of Deithwen division on it. And the distinction of Colonel. 
'Yaevinn!' An elf entering the tent shouted, his dark hair collected in a braid. 'Caemm, 
veloe! Ess'evgyriad a'dh'oine a'en va! Ess'tess!' 
The tall elf looked for a moment at the wounded colonel then at the water eyes filled with 
fear of the surgeon. Then he turned on his heel and left. 

From outside again came the sound of horses hooves pounding, screaming and the clash 
of iron. 
'There are the Black ones! Kill them!' shouted a thousand voices. Someone outside the 
tent again roared like an animal and then ended in a grunt. 
Rusty tried to stand, but his legs would not hear of it. His hands shook. 
Iola shook with strong spasms of weeping, curled up next to the stretcher of the wounded 
Nilfgaardian, in a foetal position. 
Shani was crying, without trying t hide the tears, but still held the clamps. Marti sewed 
quietly, only her lips moved in a silent monologue. 
Rusty was still unable to stand up. His eyes met the eyes of an orderly pressed into the 
corner of the tent. 
'Give me a sip of vodka,' he said with effort. 'Don't tell me you don't have any. I know 
you beasts always do.' 
 
*** 
 
General Blenheim Blenckert stood in hi stirrups and stretched his neck as her listened to 
the echoes of battle. 
'Form up the troops,' he ordered. 'Then trot over the hill. From what the scouts are 
saying, we will run directly into the right wing of the Black ones.' 
'We'll give them hell!' cried one of the young lieutenants, a youth with a thin, silky 
beard. Blenckert gave him aside long glance. 
'Bring the standard to the front,' he ordered and drew his sword. 'And give the battle cry, 
"Redania!" with all the power in your lungs! Let Foltest and Natalis's boys know that the 
relief is here.' 
 
*** 
 
Count Kobus de Ruyter had fought many battles in the last forty years. He had fought 
them since his sixteenth year of life. De Ruyter's had been soldiers for eight generations. The 
roar of battle, the rattle and crash of steel that was unbearable for everyone, Kobus de Ruyter 
perceived as a musical symphony. And at this moment he heard in the concert, new notes, 
chords and tones. 
'Hooray!' he yelled, waving his mace. 'Redania! Redania is coming! Eagles! Eagles!' 
Over the top of the hill from the north appeared riders. Above the head of the riders and 
horses fluttered a huge banner with the silver eagle of Redania. 
'Relief!' yelled de Ruyter. 'Here comes relief! Hooray! Strike at the Black ones!' 
The soldier from eight generations of soldiers noticed that the Nilfgaardians were turning 
in a counterattack and were moving to tighten their formation. He knew that it must be 
avoided. 
'Follow me,' he ordered and grabbing the banner from the hands of the standard bearer. 
'Follow me!' 
They attacked. They attacked like mad men, in a terrible but effectively way. They did 
not allow the Venendal division to form up against the Redanian cavalry. Their attack 
devastated the Nilfgaardians. The sky rocked with desperate screams. 
Kobus de Ruyter never saw or heard. A stray crossbow bolt struck him directly in the 
head. The Count slipped from the saddle and fell from his horse; the standard he held covered 
him like a shroud. 
Eight generations of de Ruyter's, who were following the battle from the other world, 
nodded with appreciation. 

 
*** 
 
'You could say that the Nordlings were saved that day by a miracle. Or a cluster of 
coincidences that nobody has been able to provide... It is true that Restif de Montholon writes 
in his book that Marshal Coehoorn made a mistake in assessing the strength and intentions of 
the enemy. That he took too much of a risk, splitting the Center Group Army and taking only 
cavalry units to the north. That he plunged recklessly into a battle in which he had the upper 
hand. That his reconnaissance was underestimated and therefore did not know about the 
Redanian auxiliary army...' 
'Cadet Puttkammer! The dubious "works" of Mister Montholon are not on the reading list 
of this school! And his imperial majesty has spoken out quite critically about this book! So 
cadet, do not quote it here. Indeed, I am surprised. So far your responses had been pretty 
good, even excellent, and suddenly you begin to clamour about miracles and clusters of 
circumstances, to let you end, allows you to criticize the military capabilities of Menno 
Coehoorn, one of the greatest leaders of the Empire. Cadet Puttkammer and the other cadet, if 
you want to pass the exam, listen to me and remember – At Brenna there were no miracles or 
coincidences, our defeat was caused by an extensive plot! Not only by hostile marauders, but 
also by subversive elements within our own ranks – various malcontents, cosmopolitans, 
renegades and traitors! An abscess, which later was burned with a white hot iron. But before 
that happened, those nasty traitors, betrayed their own nation and wove their webs and traps 
and built their networks. They tangled and betrayed Marshal Coehoorn, then deceived and 
misled him! They were rogues, without honour, conscience or simple...' 
 
*** 
 
'Motherfuckers,' wheezed Menno Coehoorn, looking through his spyglass at the right 
wing. 'Cursed motherfuckers. I'll find you, just wait and I'll teach you what it means to 
reconnoiter. De Wyngalt! Personally find the officer who was on patrol behind the hills to the 
north. And hang his entire patrol.' 
'As you command,' Ouder de Wyngalt, the Marshal's aide clicked his heels. Of course he 
did not know that Lamarr Flaut, the wanted commander from the reconnaissance patrol was 
now dying under the hooves of the Redanian cavalry, whose arrival at the fight he did not 
identify because of his own cowardice. De Wyngalt obviously could not know that for he 
himself only remained two hours of life. 
'How many are their Sir Trahe,' said Coehoorn, without taking his eye from the spyglass. 
'According to your estimate?' 
'About ten thousand,' the commander of the Seventh Daerlan replied dryly. 'Mainly 
Redania, but I also see the banners of Aedirn... There is also a unicorn, so Kaedwen as well... 
At least one squadron...' 
 
*** 
 
The Dun Banner galloped, horses hooves kicking up sand and gravel. 
'Forward, Dun Banner!' roared Centurion Digod, drunk as usual. 'Kill, kill! For 
Kaedwen! Kaedwen!' 
Damn, but I want to piss, Zyvik thought. I should have peed before the battle... Now there 
is no time. 
'Forward, Dun Banner!' 

Always the Dun Banner. When things go wrong, the Dun Banner. Who is sent as an 
expeditionary force to Temeria? The Dun Banner. Always the Dun Banner. And I want to 
piss. 
They arrived. Zyvik screamed, turned in his saddle and cut at a ear, shattering the 
shoulder and neck of a rider in a black coat with a silver star with eight points. 
'The Dun Banner! Kaedwen! Attack, attack!' 
With the pounding and crash of hooves and the scream of humans, the Dun Banner 
collided the Nilfgaardians. 
 
*** 
 
'De Mellis-Stoke and Braibant can handle this relief,' Elan Trahe, the commander of the 
Seventh Daerlan brigade said calmly. 'The forces are balanced, nothing can happen, that 
cannot be fixed. The left wing is strengthened Tyrconnel's division and the right wing has 
Magne and Venendal. And we... we can tip the balance, Lord Marshal...' 
'We will strike the breach opened by the elves,' Coehoorn an experience strategist said 
immediately. 'They will move over to the head and invoke panic. Yes, that's what we'll do, 
the Great Sun! To the banners, gentlemen! Nauzicaa and Seventh, your time has come!' 
'Long live the Emperor!' Kees van Lo yelled. 
'Mister de Wyngalt,' the Marshal turned away. 'Gather the attendants and the personal 
guard. It is the end of inactivity. We're going to attack together with the Seventh Daerlan.' 
Ouder de Wyngalt paled, but immediately caught himself. 
'Long live the Emperor!' he said, his voice barely wavering. 
 
*** 
 
Rusty cut, the wounded screamed and clawed at the table. Iola, fought bravely with the 
movements of his head, tightening the tourniquet. From the entrance of the tent came the 
sound of Shani's raised voice. 
'What are you doing? Have you all gone mad? We are trying to save the living here and 
you come here dragging the dead?' 
'But it is our own Baron Anzelm Aubry, Lady Healer! The commander of the squadron!' 
'He was the commander of the squadron! Now he's dead! You've managed to bring him 
here in one piece only by the fact that his armour is tight! Take him away. This is a hospital, 
not a graveyard!' 
'But, Lady Healer...' 
'Do not block the entrance! Oh, there carry in that one that still breathes. Or so it seems. 
Or maybe it is just gas.' 
Rusty snorted, but then frowned. 
'Shani! Come here!' 
'Remember, brat,' Rusty said through clenched teeth, leaning over crushed legs. 
'Cynicism is only permitted to a surgeon after the first ten years of practice. Do you 
understand?' 
'Yes, Mister Rusty.' 
'Take a scrapper and remove the periosteum... Damn we should anesthetize a bit... Where 
is Marti?' 
'Puking at the front of tent,' Shani said without a hit of cynicism. 'Like a cat.' 
'Sorceresses,' Rusty picked up a saw, 'instead of thinking of various terrible and 
powerful spells, they should focus on inventing one. So that they can cast it as a minor spell. 
For example, the aesthetic. Without the various problems and side effects like puking.' 

The saw grated on bone. The wounded soldier howled. 
'Tighten the tourniquet harder, Iola!' 
The bone finally gave way. Rusty put away the saw and then wiped his sweaty forehead. 
'Veins and vessels,' he nodded out of habit, but in vain, because before he even finished 
the sentence, the girls had already come over. He took the severed leg from the table and 
threw it in the corner, on a pile of other severed limbs. The wounded man had not howled or 
screamed for some time. 
'Unconscious or dead?' 
'Fainted, Mister Rusty.' 
'Great. Sew the stump, Shani. Bring in the next one! Iola go and check if Marti has 
finished vomiting everything.' 
'I am curious,' Iola said quietly, without looking up, 'how many years of experience do 
you have, Mister Rusty. A hundred?' 
 
*** 
 
After several minutes of forced march that raised a cloud of dust, the cries or the 
Decurion's and centurions finally stopped and the Vizima Regiment deployed into battle 
lines. Jarre panting and drinking in air like a fish saw Voivode Bronibor parading along the 
lines on his beautiful sorrel covered with armour plates, the Voivode was also dressed in full 
armour, and his armour was cover in blue though which made Bronibor look like a huge tin 
mackerel. 
'How are you, soldiers?' Bronibor shouted to his men. 
The ranks of pikemen responded with a roar that echoed like distant thunder. 
'You're making a lot of noise,' the Voivode said, turning his horse and walking back 
down the line, 'that means, you're doing well. When you're not doing well you whine and 
moan like old ladies. I can see from your faces that you are dying to enter the battle, that you 
dream to fight and cannot wait to take on the Nilfgaardians! Eh, soldiers of Vizima? Then I 
have good news for you! Your dreams will be fulfilled in an instant. In a short moment.' 
The Pikemen murmured again. Bronibor meanwhile arrived at the end of the line, turned 
his horse and slowly rode back. He spoke further and tapped his baton on his decorated 
saddle pommel. 
'You have swallowed dust, infants, marching behind the knights! Until now, instead of 
glory and booty, you have been smelling horseshit! You lack power and you almost did not 
reach the field of honour and glory even today, slackers. But in the end you still manage to 
get my heartfelt congratulations. In this country, whose name I have forgotten, you can 
finally show your worth as soldiers. That cloud you seen in the field is the Nilfgaardian 
cavalry, which aims to destroy our army by attacking the flank and pushing our forces into 
the swamp near the river, whose name I have forgotten, too. But you famous Vizima 
pikemen, will defend the honour of King Foltest and Constable Natalis by filling in the gap 
created by our ranks. You will close the gap with your breasts, halting the Nilfgaardians 
charge. Rejoice, eh, comrades? Are you bursting with pride?' 
Jarre, squeezing the shaft of his pike, looked around. Nothing pointed to the fact that the 
soldiers were happy with the prospect of the approaching fight, and if they were proud of 
their task, their pride was skilfully masked. Melfi, who was to his right, murmured a prayer to 
himself. To his left, Deuslax, an optimistic professional, sucked up snot, coughed and cursed 
to himself nervously. 
Bronibor turned his horse and straightened in the saddle. 
'I did not hear you!' he bellowed. 'I asked if you are fucking bursting with pride?' 

This time the pikemen, seeing no other way out, roared with a loud voice that they were 
proud. Jarre also roared. Just like everyone else. 
'Good!' the Voivode turned his horse to face the army. 'Now rally! Centurions, what are 
you waiting for? Form a square, front row kneeling, second row remain standing! Plant your 
pikes! Not by this side, you idiot! Yes I'm talking to you, hairy bastard! Move closer, 
shoulder to shoulder! Ah, now you look terrific! Almost like you are an army!' 
Jarre found himself in the second row. He pressed the butt of the pike into the ground and 
gripped it in fear in his sweaty hands. Melfi dimly repeated several words that were mostly 
related to the intimate details of the life of the Nilfgaardians, dogs, bitches, kings, constables, 
governors and all their mothers. 
The cloud in the field approached. 
'Don't waste your farts or chattering teeth now!' Bronibor cried. 'You can't use those 
noises to scare the Nilfgaardian horses! Let there be no mistake! Moving towards us is the 
Nauzicaa and Seventh Daerlan divisions, an excellent, well-trained army! They cannot be 
scared! They cannot be beat! You have to kill them! Raised those pikes higher!' 
From the distance came the sound of hooves, still far away but growing louder. The earth 
began to shake. In the cloud of dust, the sun sparkled off of flashing blades. 
'You are fucking lucky, men of Vizima,' the Voivode shouted again. 'You are not using a 
normal pike but a new type which is twenty feet long! While the swords of the Nilfgaardians 
are only three and a half feet long. You know how to count? They know how to count too. 
But they think that you will not hold and show your true nature, the nature of a coward. The 
Black Ones are counting on those pikes hitting the ground and you men scurrying across the 
field like rabbits and then they can cut you down comfortably without complication. 
Remember , shitheads, although fear can lend your feet speed, you cannot outrun a horse. 
Those who want to live, who want fame and booty, will resist! Resist viciously! Resist like a 
wall! And keep the ranks!' 
Jarre looked around. The crossbowmen that were behind the line of pikemen were already 
turning their cranks, within the square, halberds, javelins, spears and pitchforks were being 
lifted. The ground shook harder still. They could make out the black wall of the cavalry 
rushing towards them, and could make out individual riders. 
'Mama, mama,' Melfi repeated with trembling lips. 'Mama, mama...' 
'...Fucking whoresons,' Deuslax murmured. 
The rumbling increased. Jarre went to lick his lips but failed. His tongue had stopped 
moving, it had become strangely stiff and was a dry as sawdust. The rumbling grew louder. 
'Get ready!' Bronibor roared, drawing his sword. 'Put your shoulder to your neighbour! 
None of you go to war alone! The only cure for the fear you feel is that pike in your hands! 
Ready for the battle! Put the pikes into the chest of the horse! What must we do, soldiers of 
Vizima? That is a question?' 
'Resist!' the pikemen shouted in unison. 'Resist like a wall! Keep the ranks!' 
Jarre roared with everyone. From under the hooves of the approaching horses sprayed 
gravel and sand. The riders they carried howled like demons, waving their swords. 
Jarre held onto his pike, hid his head on his shoulder and closed his eyes. 
 
*** 
 
Jarre, without interrupting his writing, used the stump of his hand to wave away a wasp 
that was hovering over the inkwell. 
 
Field Marshal Coehoorn's plan failed – his counterattack against the flank was stopped 
by the heroic Vizima infantry and Voivode Bronibor, even though they paid a bloody tax. 

While the men of Vizima resisted the strong pressure from Nilfgaard on the left flank the 
enemy continued on the right. Soon our troops gained the upper hand on the right flank as 
well, where the dwarves and tough condottiere resisted Nilfgaard's grip. From our ranks 
arose a triumphant cry, and in the hearts of our fighters enter a new spirit. The confidence of 
the Nilfgaardian soldiers fled, their arms grew heavy and their strength ebbed. Some of them 
retreated, other still resisted, but now uncoordinated, in scattered groups, soon besieged 
from all sides. 
Then the enemy commander realised that the battle was lost. Surrounded by his loyal 
officers and knights, they bought him a new horse and pleaded with him to escape and save 
his life. But in the Field Marshal's chest beat a brave heart. 
'It is not right,' he cried, pushing away the reins being handed to him. 'Only a coward 
would flee from the field, where the empire has lost so many good men.' 
Then brave Menno Coehoorn said... 
 
*** 
 
'There is no way to escape,' said Menno Coehoorn soberly, looking around the 
battlefield. 'They have us surrounded.' 
'Give me your coat and helmet, sir' Captain Sievers wiped sweat and blood from his face. 
'Take my things and horse... Do not protest! You must survive, Lord Marshal. Your life, your 
skills are too valuable for the empire, irreplaceable... My Daerlan will hit the Nordlings, they 
will be attracted to us, and you can try to break out down there by the pond...' 
'I shall leave,' Coehoorn muttered, grabbing the reins given to him. 
'It is an honour,' Seivers stood up in the saddle. 'We are soldiers! Of the Seventh 
Daerlan!' 
'Good luck,' Coehoorn murmured, throwing a cloak with the silver scorpion around his 
shoulders. 'Seivers?' 
'Yes, Lord Marshal?' 
'Nothing. Good luck, kid.' 
'You too, sir. Behind me, men!' 
Coehoorn stared after them for a long time, until the point where Sievers' group with 
screaming and the pounding of hooves, collided with the condottieri. The condottieri 
outnumber them and other units rushed in to help. The Black cloaks disappeared among the 
condottieri gray and everything was enveloped in dust. 
A significant cough from de Wyngalt brought Field Marshal Coehoorn back to reality. He 
adjusted the harness and stirrups and mounted the stallion. 
'Let's go!' he ordered. 
At first they were fine. The Nordlings made a gap in their defences, as they concentrated 
their forces on doggedly attacking the last division of soldiers who had survived the 
destruction of the Nauzicaa brigade. The Marshal made his way out of the encirclement, but 
not without obstacles. The Nilfgaardians had to fight the light cavalry, who according to their 
colours where from Brugge. 
Coehoorn stopped pretending heroism, he just wanted to survive. He looked back at his 
private guards, struggling with the cavalry, he rode hastily with his assistants towards the 
river, flattening himself and clinging to his horse's neck. 
The way was clear on the other side of the river, behind some bent willows, was an empty 
plain, were he could see no armies. Ouder de Wyngalt also saw this and shouted with 
triumph. 
Too soon. 

The slow lazy current of the steam was the only thing that separated them from the green 
field. They came at it at a full gallop, after a couple of steps the horses sank up to their 
stomachs into a swamp. 
The Marshal flew across the stallion's head and landed in the mud. All around him horses 
and people screamed. Amidst the pandemonium Menno suddenly heard a different sound. A 
sound that signified death. 
The sound of arrows. 
He lunged towards the river. Cutting through deep mud. Beside him a wading aide fell on 
his face in the mud, the Marshal saw an arrow in his back. At the same time he felt a hard 
blow to his head. He staggered, but did not fall, because he was up to mid-thigh in the marsh. 
He wanted to scream, but only managed to croak. 
I'm alive, he thought with relief, still alive. A horse who was trying to free itself from the 
clutches of the stick mud had kicked the Marshal's helmet, smashing the plate and cutting his 
cheek, smashing his teeth and slashing his tongue... I'm bleeding... I can taste blood... But 
I'm alive... 
Again he heard the sound of a bow, the whistle of arrows and the crack of thunder as the 
bolts pierced through armour, the shouting, the neighing of horses and the splash of blood. 
The Marshal looked back and saw at the edge of the shooters a small, stock, squat figure in 
chainmail in helmets. Dwarves, he thought. 
The sound of ropes from the crossbows, the whistle of bolts. The neighing of terrified 
horses. The sound of screaming form people trapped in the mud and water. 
Ouder de Wyngalt turned towards the shooters and called to surrender, in a high, squeaky 
voice he begged for mercy and offered ransom. He grabbed his sword by the blade, the 
internationally known gesture and held it towards the dwarves. The gesture was not 
understood or wrongly understood – two arrows hit him in the chest so hard that the impact 
almost lifted him out of the mud. 
Coehoorn ripped the damaged helmet from his head. He knew the Nordling language well 
enough. 
'Mmmenno... Coehoorn...' he stammered, spitting blood. 'Mmarshal... Coehoorn...' 
'What is he spluttering, Zoltan?' one of the dwarves wonder aloud. 
'Who cares, fuck this dog and his chatter! See the embroidery on his cloak, Munro?' 
'A silver scorpion! Haaa! Guys, nail the motherfucker! For Caleb Stratton!' 
'For Caleb!' 
The strings rang. Coehoorn received one arrow in his chest, one in the groin and one 
below the collar bone. 
The Nilfgaardian Field Marshal fell back into the slush, knotweed and pondweed and 
disappeared under the weight of his armour. 
Who the devil is Caleb Stratton, he thought, I've never even heard of Caleb... 
Turbid water, dense with blood and mud from the Cholta River closed over his head and 
into his lungs. 
 
*** 
 
She left the tent to get some fresh air. Then she saw him sitting next to the blacksmith's 
bench. 
'Jarre?' 
He raised his eyes. In them was a void. 
'Iola,' he said with difficulty, his lips swollen. 'How are you...?' 
'What a question!' she immediately interrupted him. 'A better question is how did you 
get here?' 

'We brought our commander... Voivode Bronibor... He's hurt...' 
'But so are you! Show me your hand! Goddess! You're bleeding to death!' 
Jarre stared at herm but Iola suddenly began to wonder if he was seeing anything. 
'There was a battle,' said the boy, his teeth chattering. 'We must stand like a wall... firmly 
in the ranks... It was easier to carry the wounded to a military hospital... The severely 
wounded. Orders.' 
'Show me your hand.' 
Jarre gave a short cry, his teeth chatter as if in fever. Iola frowned. 
'It looks bad... Jarre, Jarre... Mother Nenneke will be angry... Come with me.' 
She saw him pale when he entered the tent. When he smelt the stench. He staggered. She 
steadied him. She saw him staring at the bloody table. At the man who lay there. At the 
surgeon, the little halfling who jumped suddenly, stomped his feet, cursed, swore and hurled 
his scalpel to the ground. 
'What the hell! Fuck! Why? Why?' 
Nobody answered the question. 
'Who was that?' 
'Voivode Bronibor,' Jarre said in a weak voice, looking straight ahead, his eyes blank. 
'Our commander... We stood in firm ranks. Order. Like a wall. And Melfi killed...' 
'Mister Rusty,' Iola said. 'This man is a friend of mine... He is hurt...' 
'He is still on his feet,' the surgeon said coolly. 'And this is expecting a trepanation. 
There is no room for favouritism...' 
At this point, Jarre with great sensitivity dramatically fainted and fell to the floor. The 
halfling snorted irritably. 
'Well, well, get him on the table,' he commanded. 'Ah, his hand. I wonder what is 
holding it on? Probably his sleeve. Iola, tourniquet. Harder! Do not dare cry here! Shani, give 
me the saw!' 
With a sickening screech the saw bit into the crushed bones of the elbow joint. Jarre woke 
up and shouted. Awfully, shrilly – but briefly. Once the bone gave way, he immediately 
fainted again. 
 
*** 
 
And so the power of Nilfgaard lay in the dirt and dust of the fields of Brenna, and the 
march north by the Empire was laid to an end. The losses for the Empire amounted to forty-
thousand killed and captured men. The foundation of Elite Knights fell. They died in captivity 
or went missing without a trace like such as the leaders, Menno Coehoorn, Braibant, de 
Mellis-Stoke, van Lo, Tyrconnel, Eggebracht and others, whose names have not been 
preserved in our archives. 
Brenna was indeed the beginning of the end. But it is worth writing that this battle would 
have been a small stone in the building and its importance would have been small if the fruits 
of victory had not been used wisely. Constable John Natalis did not rest on his laurels, but 
immediately went to the south. An unexpected counterattack led by Adam Pangratt and Julia 
Abatemarco surprised two divisions of the Third Army which were running late to relieve 
Coehoorn, and were routed nec nuntius cladis. At this new the rest of the Center Group Army 
crossed shamefully back over the Yaruga and escaped in a hurry, and Foltest and Natalis 
followed on their heels. The Imperials lost their baggage train and all their siege engines 
which they planned to use to conquer Vizima, Gors Velen and Novigrad. 
Like an avalanche rolling down from the mountains into the valley that collects more and 
more snow and gains power, so did the consequences of the Battle of Brenna provide more 
damage to the Nilfgaardians. The Verden Group Army was heavily afflicted by pirate raids 
and attacks from Skellige and King Ethain from Cidaris. When Commander Duke de Wett 
learned of the disaster at Brenna and the news reached him that Foltest and John Natalis had 
ordered a forced march, he immediately sounded a retreat and in panic fled across the river 
to Cintra and escaping significant losses to his troops, because word had gotten around 
about Nilfgaard's defeat and a new rebellion was rising in force in Verden. Only troops 
remained in the forts of Nastrog, Rozrog and Bodrog and after the Peace of Cintra they 
emerged with honour with banners aloft. 
Meanwhile, in Aedirn, the news of what happen at Brenna caused the antagonised Kings 
Demavend and Henselt to join together in arms against Nilfgaard's East Group Army, which 
was led by Duke Ardal aep Dahy into the Pontar valley, unable to resist the combined forces 
of the two kings. With the addition of the strength of the troops from Redania and the 
guerrilla squads of Queen Meve, who undertook combat actions in the rear of the enemy, 
they forced Nilfgaard to Aldersberg. Ardal aep Dahy prepared for battle, but due to fate he 
suddenly became serious ill, perhaps from spoiled food he got colic and diarrhoea and two 
days later died in pain. Demavend and Henselt, without waiting, launched an attack against 
Nilfgaard in Aldersberg, surely because of historical justice, Nilfgaard suffered a heavy 
defeat, though they still had numerical superiority. But daring, spirit and technique won out 
over blind, brute force. 
It is necessary to mention one other thing – namely that it is still unknown what 
happening at Brenna to Menno Coehoorn. Some believe that he fell with his soldiers and his 
remains, unrecognised were laid to rest in a common grave. Others speculate that he 
escaped, but from fear of the Imperial wrath never returned to Nilfgaard, but instead resorted 
to the Dryads in Brokilon and became a hermit in the forest. In remorse he lived for years in 
seclusion and separation and eventually died. 
Among ordinary people circulated the rumour that the famous Marshal in the night after 
the battle returned to the field at Brenna and could not stand looking at the tragedy and 
hanged himself from a aspen on a hill, which from that time on was called Gallows. At night 
it is said that his spirit wanders the battle field, lamenting and crying out 'Give me back my 
legions!'. 
 
'Grandpa Jarre! Grandpa Jarre!' 
Jarre looked up from the paper and pushed his glasses further up on his nose. 
'Grandpa Jarre!' screamed the high pitched voice of his youngest granddaughter, a bright 
and lively six year old, which, thank the gods, looked like her mother, Jarre's daughter and 
not his son-in-law. 
'Grandpa Jarre! Granma Lucienne told me to tell you that is enough writing for today and 
that dinner is on the table!' 
Jarre carefully place the reams of paper and put the cork into the inkwell. The stump of 
his hand throbbed with pain. The weather is changing, he thought, it's going to rain. 
'Grandpa Jarreeeeee!' 
'I'm coming, Ciri. I'm coming.' 
 
*** 
 
Before he was finished with the last of the wounded it was already past midnight. The last 
operation was performed under artificial light - lamps, candles and also magic. Marti 
Sodergren regained consciousness after overcoming her crisis and though deadly pale, stiff 
and unnatural in her movements, like a golem, she effectively performed spells. 
It was dark when they left the tent, the four of them laid flat on some canvas. The 
meadow was full of fires. Various fires - fires of campers, unstable fires, torches and 

firebrands. Through the night sounds resounded through the air, shouting matches, singing, 
chanting and cheering. 
The night was alive around them too with disjointed cries and the groans of the wounded. 
Supplications and sighs of the dying. They did not hear any of it. They were used to the 
sounds of suffering and dying, to them the sounds were ordinary, natural and blended into the 
night with the croaking of the frogs in the marshes by the River Cholta or the cicadas 
chirping by Golden Pond. 
Marti Sodergren was silent, leaning on the shoulder of the halfling. Iola and Shani, 
hugging, tightly, occasionally issued a laugh at something completely stupid. They all sat 
next to the tent, each drank a glass of vodka and Marti delighted everyone was one last spell - 
an intoxicating spell, usually used for tooth extraction. 
Rusty felt cheated the treatment - the drink that was bound by magic, rather than relax 
him, or reducing his weariness, it intensified it. Instead of granting oblivion, it reminded him. 
It seemed that the magical alcohol affected only Iola and Shani as it should. 
He turned and saw the moonlight on the faces of the two girls, bright and silvery with 
tears. 
'I wonder,' he said licking his dry and callous lips, 'who has won the battle. Does anyone 
know?' 
Marti turned to face him, but remained silent. 
The cicadas sang among the willows and alders by the pond, the frogs croaked, the 
wounded wailed, prayed and sighed. And died. Iola and Shani laughed amongst their tears. 
 
*** 
 
Marti Sodergren died two weeks after the battle. She had an affair with an officer of the 
condottieri Free Company. She tried this adventure as something temporary. Unlike the 
officer. When Marti, who liked changes, became involved with a cavalry officer, the 
condottiere, mad with jealousy, stabbed her. He hung for it, but they were unable to save the 
healer. 
Rusty and Iola died a year after the battle, in Maribor, the biggest explosion of the 
epidemic hemorrhagic fever, also known as the Scarlet Death, or - from the name of the ship 
which it was imported from - The Catriona Plague. 
All the doctors and most of the priests hurried to Maribor, along with Rusty and Iola. To 
heal because they were doctors. The fact that there was no cure for the Scarlet Death did not 
matter to them. Both were infected. He died in her arms, the strong, confident grip of her 
large, ugly, peasant hands. She died four days later. Alone. 
Shani died seventy-two years after the battle as a famous and respected retired professor 
of medicine at the University of Oxenfurt. Future generations of surgeons repeated her 
famous quote - "Sew red with red, yellow with yellow and white with white. And everything 
will be all right". 
Hardly anyone noticed, after delivering this quote she always secretly wiped away tears. 
Hardly anyone. 
 
*** 
 
Frogs croaked, cicadas buzzed, Iola and Shani giggled and cried. 
'I wonder,' repeated Milo Vanderbeck, a halfling, a field surgeon, known as Rusty. 'I 
wonder who won the battle?' 
'Rusty,' said Marti Sodergren. 'This is really the last thing I'd be interested in your place.' 
 

 
Some of the flames were high and strong, shining brightly and vividly, while others were 
small, shaky and trembling, and the flames darkened and they sank. At the end of the row was 
a tiny flame, one so weak that it was barely smouldering, barely alight and then it shimmered 
with great effort and almost extinguished. 
'Whose is that dying light?' asked the witcher. 
'Yours,' said Death. 
 
Flourens Delannoy 
Fairytales and Stories 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
