Chapter Nine 
 
 
The plateau, whose far end was bathed in fog at the foot of a giant mountain, resembled a 
stone sea. It rippled forming mounds and curling crests that looked like the sharp teeth of a 
reef. The wreckages of ships contributed to that feeling. There were dozens of wrecks. The 
remnants of galleys, caravels and longships. Some gave the impression of only being here a 
short time, while others were no more than a few piles of boards and ribs and were hardly 
recognisable and had certainly been there for decades, if not centuries. 
Some ships were overturned and others were tipped on their sides and looked like they 
had been washed here by an immense storm or hurricane. Other ships gave the impression 
that they were still sailing the ocean. They stood straight, wedged between rocks, their masts 
towered proudly into the sky and the spars still flapped with ragged sails. They even had a 
ghostly crew – stuck in the rotten planks and tangled in the ropes where skeletons of dead 
sailors sentenced to an eternal voyage. 
Alarmed by the appearance of a rider and frightened by the sound of pounding hooves, 
from the masts, yards, ropes and skeletons broke swarms of black birds, cawing. The flock 
circled for a moment over the edge of the abyss, at the bottom of which lay a lake, gray and 
smooth as mercury. On the cliff, towering over the plain of wrecks, half hanging over the 
lake, embedded in cliff was a dark, gloomy castle. 
Kelpie recoiled, snorted, laid her ears back and looks suspiciously at the remains of the 
ships, skeleton and the whole landscape of death. The black birds had returned and once 
again settled on the broken masts, spars, bones, skulls and broken decks. The birds knew that 
they did not need to worry about one lone rider. 
'Easy, Kelpie,' Ciri said. 'This is the end of the road. This is the right place and the right 
time.' 
 
*** 
 
She appeared before the walls from nowhere, as if the wind blew her from the plain of 
ghostly wrecks. The sentries standing guard at the gate were the first to detect her presence, 
alerted by the cries of the jackdaws. Now they were shouting and gesticulating, pointing their 
fingers and calling to their comrades. 
When she arrived at the gate, there was already a crowd. Everyone stared down at her – 
the few who knew her or had seen her before, like Boreas Mun and Dacre Silifant, were 
greatly outnumbered by those who had only heard about her, those newly recruited by 
Skellen, mercenaries and common ravagers from Ebbing and the surrounding areas, who now 
looked down in amazement at the girl with the scar on her face and the sword on her back. 
The beautiful, black mare raised its head high, snorting and restlessly ringing its shoes on the 
cobblestones of the courtyard. 
The murmuring ceased. There was almost complete silence. The mare lifted her legs like 
a dancer; her shoes rang like a hammer on an anvil. It took a long time before the men 
crossed their path. One of them with a hesitant and frightened movement, reached out to 
grasp the reins. The mare snorted. 
'Take me,' the girl said loudly, 'to the master of this castle.' 
Boreas Mun himself did not know why he did it, but he held her stirrup and offered his 
arm. The other men held the snorting and struggling mare. 
'Do you recognise me, maiden?' Boreas said quietly. 'We have met.' 

'Where?' 
'On the ice.' 
She looked him directly in the eyes. 
'I did not notice your faces,' she said impassively. 
'You were the Lady of the Lake,' he nodded his head very seriously. 'Why have you 
come here, girl?' 
'Why? For Yennefer. And my destiny.' 
'Rather for your death,' he whispered. 'This is the castle Stygga. In your place, I would 
quickly flee. Perhaps there is still time.' 
She looked at him again. Boreas realised what that look meant. 
Stefan Skellen appeared. He looked at the girl for a long time with his arms crossed. 
Finally he gestured vigorously for her to follow him. She went without a word, escorted on 
all sides my armed men. 
'A strange girl,' Boreas said through clenched teeth, shivering. 
'Fortunately, she's not our problem,' Dacre Silifant said scathingly. 'I'm surprised you 
talked to her. That witch killed Vargas and Fripp and Ola Harsheim...' 
'The Owl killed Ola Harsheim,' Boreas cut him off, 'not here. She spared our lives on the 
ice, but she could have slaughtered us all like puppies. All of us. Even the Owl.' 
'Look at her,' Dacre spat on the cobblestones. 'She'll be rewarded for her mercy, by the 
sorcerer and Bonhart. You'll see, Boreas, what they'll do to her. Remove all her skin while 
she is alive, in thin strips.' 
'That's certain,' Boreas grumbled. 'Because they are scoundrels. And we are no better, 
because we are in their service.' 
'Did we have any other choice? No.' 
Suddenly, one of Skellen's mercenaries screamed, then another. Someone cursed and 
sighed. Another pointed silently. 
On the battlements, the corbels, the roofs, towers, parapets, gutters and gargoyles were 
covered as far as the eye could see in black birds. Quietly, without a squawk they came from 
the wrecked shipyard and now quietly, without a sound, sat and waited. 
'They sense death,' muttered one of the mercenaries. 
'And carrion,' added another. 
'We had no choice,' Silifant repeated mechanically looking at Boreas. 
Boreas looked at the birds. 
'Maybe it's time,' he replied quietly, 'to find one.' 
 
*** 
 
They climbed a wide stair case with three landings, passing a row of statues set in niches 
along a corridor, past a gallery and that surrounded a hall. Ciri walked boldly, without fear, 
neither frightened by the weapons or the escort. She lied when she said she did not remember 
the faces of the people from the frozen lake. She remembered. She remembered how Stefan 
Skellen, the one who was now leading her through the gloomy corridors of the castle, 
shivered and chattered his teeth on the ice. 
Now, when he looked back at her his eyes searing, she felt that he was still afraid. She 
sighed with relief. 
They entered a hall, high pillars supported the ribbed vault and large chandeliers hung 
from the roof like giant spiders. Ciri saw who was waiting there for her, Fear dug into her 
bowls like an iceberg, clenching it into a fist and twisting. 
Bonhart in three steps was in front of her. With both hands he grabbed her blouse, lifted 
her off the ground and pulled her in tightly before his pale, fish eyes. 

'Hell, he wheezed, 'must be really terrible if you prefer me.' 
She did not answer. She smelt alcohol on his breath. 
'Or maybe hell did not want you, you little beast. The devil's tower spit you out, in 
disgust after tasting your poison.' 
He pulled her closer. She turned away from his face in disgust. 
'You're afraid,' he gurgled. 'Rightly afraid. Here is the end of your journey. You'll not 
get away. Here in this castle, we will release the blood from your veins.' 
'Finished, Mister Bonhart?' 
She immediately recognised the voice that spoke. It was Vilgefortz, the wizard with 
whom she had met twice on the island of Thanedd. The first time while he was a prisoner in 
chains, and again when he followed her to the Tower of the Gulls. Then on the island, he had 
been very handsome. Now his face had changed, something had made him deformed and 
awful. 
'Excuse me, Mister Bonhart,' the sorcerer did not move from his throne-like chair, 'it is I, 
the lord of castle Stygga who should assume the pleasant task of welcoming our guest, the 
maiden Cirilla of Cintra, Pavetta's daughter, Calanthe's granddaughter and descendant of 
Lara Dorren aep Shiadhal. Be welcome. Come closer, please.' 
The last words were not spoken under a mask of courtesy and ridicule. They were only 
threat and order. Ciri immediately felt that she would not be able to resist this command. She 
felt fear. Terrible fear. 
'Closer,' hissed Vilgefortz. 
Now she could see what had happened to his face. The left eye was significantly smaller 
than the right, blinking and squinting in a wrinkled eye socket. His gaze was terrible. 
'The posture of the brave with a trace of fear in her face,' the wizard said, cocking his 
head. 'You have my appreciation. If your courage does not come from stupidity. Immediately 
dispel any fantasies. As Bonhart has said, there is no escape. Either by teleport or with your 
special abilities.' 
She knew he was right. Earlier, she had told herself that even in the last moment she 
could run and hide among the times and places. Now she knew that this hope was just an 
illusion, a fantasy. The castle vibrated with hostile, alien magic, magic that penetrated her 
like a parasite crawling in her belly and her brain. There was nothing she could do. She was 
in the enemies hands. Powerless. 
It cannot be helped, she thought, I knew what I was doing. I knew why I had to come here. 
The other reasons were just false hope. Whatever will happen, will happen. 
'Good,' said Vilgefortz. 'A proper assessment of the situation. Whatever will happen, will 
happen. More precisely – It will be, as I decide. I wonder if you can guess, what I will 
decide.' 
She tried to answer, but before she could overcome the resistance in her shrunken and 
dried throat, Vilgefortz probed her thoughts and again and interrupted. 
'Of course you do, Lady of the Worlds. Lady of time and space. Yes, yes, my wonderful, 
I am not surprised by your visit. I know where you ran away to from the lake, and know what 
you have done. I know how you got here. The only thing I don't know is if your journey was 
long. Or the number of experiences delivered.' 
Again with a malicious smile her cut her off. 
'Oh, no need to respond. I know it was very interesting and exciting. I'm anxious to try it 
also. You do not know how I envy that talent of yours. I'll need you to share it with me, my 
wonderful. Yes, "need" is the right word. Until you share with me your talent, I will not let 
you out of my hands. 

Ciri finally realised that it was not only fear gripping her throat. The sorcerer magically 
throttled and strangled her. He mocked her and humiliated her, before the eyes of his 
followers. 
'Free... Yennefer,' she managed to get out, coughing with the effort. 'Free her... And you 
can do whatever you want with me.' 
Bonhart burst out laughing, Stefan Skellen also started to laugh dryly. Vilgefortz poke at 
the corner of his macabre eye with his little finger. 
'You cannot be so foolish as to think that, and so you will do what I want. Your offer is 
pathetic, so pathetic and ridiculous.' 
'You need me...' she lifted her head, though it cost her a lot of strength. 'To have a child 
with me. Everybody wants that, you do too. Yes, I am in your power, I came here on my 
own... You did not catch me, though you chased me halfway around the world. I came here 
on my own and I give myself to you. For Yennefer. For her life. Does this seem ridiculous? 
Then try to take me by force, take me the hard way... You'll see how fast you lose the urge to 
laugh.' 
Bonhart stood beside her in a jump, threatening her with a whip. Vilgefortz nodded 
almost imperceptibly, and slightly movement of his hand, but it was enough to knock the 
whip from the hand of the bounty hunter, and he stumbled like he had been hit by a wagon 
full of coal. 
'Mister Bonhart,' Vilgefortz said, rubbing his fingers. 'I noticed you still have difficulty 
adapting to the duties of being my guest. Try to remember that my guests my destroy 
furniture and artwork, steal small valuables and dirty the carpets and facility chambers. They 
cannot beat or rape other guests. The last, at least until the host has finished beating and 
raping and signs that you can begin. From what I've just said, you should be able to draw the 
right conclusions. As to you Ciri, I'll help you. You delivered yourself to me humbly and 
think that I'll do everything you please. And you think this is an extremely generous offer. 
You are wrong, because it is I who will do what I please with you. For example, I would, by 
way of revenge for Thanedd, like to take at least one of your eyes, but I cannot, because I'm 
afraid that you would not survive.' 
 Now or never, Ciri thought. She turned around and drew her sword, Swallow. Suddenly, 
the whole room began to spin, she fell and badly hit her knees. She lowered her forehead, 
almost touching the floor, struggling with the emetic reflex. The sword slipped from her 
numb fingers. 
Someone picked it up. 
'Now,' Vilgefortz drawled, leaning his chin on his folded hands as if in prayer. 'Where 
was I? Oh, yes, right, your offer. Life and freedom for your Yennefer... For what? For you 
voluntary surrender, willingly, without violence and coercion? I'm sorry, Ciri. What I need to 
do to you, without violence and coercion I simply cannot do.' 
He watched with interest as the girl coughed, wheezed and spat thick saliva to prevent 
vomiting. 
'Yes, yes,' he continued. 'That's what I'll do with you, you'll never surrender willingly, I 
assure you. And that is why your offer is not only pathetic and ridiculous, but also worthless. 
For this reason, I reject it. Grab her and take her to the lab!' 
 
*** 
 
The Laboratory was not much different from the one that Ciri knew of at the temple of 
Melitele in Ellander. It was brightly lit, clean, equipped with long tables with metal plates and 
shelves full of glass – flasks, test tubes, retorts, bowls and all sorts of other gadgets. 

As in Ellander it also smelled strongly of alcohol, ether, formalin and something else, 
something that inspired terror. Even there, in the friendly temple, opposite the friendly 
priestess Nenneke and Yennefer, Ciri felt fear in the laboratory. And there, in Ellander, no 
one dragged her into the lab by violence; nobody held her arms in an iron grip. There, in 
Ellander, was no steel chair, whose shape was sadistically quite obvious. There were no 
white-dressed and clean-shaven-headed types, no Bonhart, no Skellen, excitedly licking his 
lips. Nor were there Vilgefortz, with one good eye and one unnaturally small and terribly 
busy. 
Vilgefortz turned away from the table where he had been arranging terrible instruments 
for a long time. 
'You see, my wonderful,' he began, approaching her, 'you are for me the key to power 
and dominance. Not only in this world, which is doomed anyway, but over all worlds. Over 
the myriad of places and times that arose after the conjunction. Surely you understand, 
because you yourself visited some of these places and times.' 
Slowly he rolled up his sleeves and continued. 
'I'm ashamed to admit, but I'm terribly attracted to power. It's trivial, I know, but I want 
to be a ruler. A Sovereign, before who all will fall on this face and glorify him only because 
he exists, and worship as a god, if he deign to save their world from destruction – even if it is 
done on a whim. Oh, Ciri, my heart rejoices when I think about how I will generously reward 
the faithful and how I will cruelly punish the disobedient and rebellious. Whole generations 
will pray to me and beg me for pardon, mercy and forgiveness. Generations of whole worlds. 
Listen, Ciri. Do you hear those prayers? Protect us from famine, plague, fire, was and your 
wrath, O Almighty Vilgefortz...' 
He wiggled his fingers in front of her eyes and suddenly grabbed her face violently. Ciri 
cried out and tried to escape, but he held her firmly. Her lips trembled. Vilgefortz saw this. 
'Child of Destiny,' he laughed and from the corners of his mouth dripped foam. 'Aen Hen 
Ichaer, the Elder Blood... is now all mine!' 
He straightened abruptly and wiped his mouth. 
'Fools and mystics,' he said in his usual calm tone, 'tried to find the secret of your 
existence in ancient legends and prophecies, in your genealogy they searched for the origins 
of your gene – a legacy of their ancestors. They have confused the night sky with the stars 
reflected on the surface of the water. The mystics believed that the gene would continue to 
develop, thanks to the evolution of new possibilities and achieve greater power in your child 
or in your child's child. And around you grew a magical aura enveloping you in clouds of 
smoke from incense. They truth is, however, trivial, one might say organic – the important 
thing here is your blood. But in the literal sense, not the figurative sense of the word.' 
He raised a glass syringe from the table about a half foot long. It ended in a thin, slightly 
curved point. Ciri felt her mouth go dry. The sorcerer examined the instrument in the light of 
a lamp. 
'My assistance will help you undress and get you settled in the chair...Yes, that chair 
which you have been so curiously eyeing. You will have to remain for sometime in a rather 
uncomfortable position, until I use this tool to inseminate you. It will not be so bad, during 
the whole procedure you'll be under the influence of powerful elixirs that I will be injecting 
to ensure the proper implantation of the egg and to prevent an ectopic pregnancy. Don't 
worry, I've had experience, I've done it a hundred times. You may be a child of the Elder 
Blood, but I do not suppose that your fallopian tubes are somehow anatomically different 
from the tubes of ordinary girls.' 
Vilgefortz talked and talked, obviously relishing in his own words. 
'And now for the most important thing, you may be upset, you may be happy, but know 
that your child will not be born. Who knows, maybe it would have been a great chosen one 

with extraordinary abilities, the saviour of the world and the king of all the nations. However, 
no one can guarantee this and besides I do not intent to wait that long. I need blood. More 
specifically, placental blood. Once you have developed a placenta, I'll remove it. The rest of 
my plans and intentions, as you can understand, do not concern you, so there is no use in 
giving you useless information.' 
He made a theatrical pause. Ciri could not stop her lips from trembling. 
'And now,' the wizard gestured with a flourish, 'I invite you to your chair, princess.' 
'It would be worth it,' Bonhart sneered under his grey moustache, 'to see the look on that 
bitch, Yennefer's face. She deserves it.' 
'Of course,' Vilgefortz wiped bubbly foam from his lips again. 'Fertilization is a sacred, 
noble and solemn affair, in which the family should assist. And Yennefer is something like a 
mother to her. In all primitive cultures, mothers of the bride are present at this ritual. Quickly 
bring Yennefer here!' 
'With regard to the fertilization,' Bonhart said bending over Ciri, who the sorcerer's 
minions had already started to undress, 'would it not be possible to do it the old, proven way, 
Lord Vilgefortz? In accordance with nature?' 
Skellen snorted and shook his head. Vilgefortz frowned. 
'No,' he said frostily. 'It is not, Bonhart.' 
Ciri, as if only now realising the seriousness of the situation, cried shrilly. Once, twice. 
'Well, well,' the sorcerer clicked. 'With head held high and a direct gaze you entered the 
lion's den, my dear, and now you are afraid of a thin glass tube. That's a shame.' 
Ciri ignored his admonitions and screamed until the laboratory glassware rattled. 
And suddenly the whole of castle Stygga responded with cries of alarm. 
 
*** 
 
'Woe to us,' said Zadarlik scrapping a spear through the manure between the stones in the 
courtyard. 'Woe, woe.' 
He looked at his companions, but none of the guards were saying anything. Nor was 
Boreas Mun, who had stayed with the guards at the gate. By his own will, because he had not 
been ordered to stay. He could have gone with the Owl like Silifant, could have seen with his 
own eyes what was going to happen to the Lady of the Lake and what fate awaited her. But 
he preferred to stay in the yard, in the open, away from the rooms and halls of the keep, 
where they had led the girl. He was sure her screams wouldn't reach here. 
'Those black birds are an evil sign,' Zadarlik pointed to the jackdaws sitting on the walls 
and roofs. 'I get a bad feeling from the girl who came in on the black mare. This is ugly 
business serving the Owl, I tell you. Rumour has it that the Owl is no longer the imperial 
coroner, but an outlaw like us. That the Emperor has sentenced him to death. And when he is 
picked up, woe to all who are with him. Woe to us.' 
'Ay, ay,' said a second guard, a bearded man in a hat decorated with feathers. 'The stake 
awaits us! Not even the gods can stand before the imperial wrath.' 
'Do not worry,' a third guard casually waved his hand, who had only come to castle 
Stygga recently with the last group of mercenaries. 'The Emperor will not care about us, he 
has other worries. There is talk of a battle somewhere in the north. The Nordlings killed the 
Imperials, bled them properly.' 
'In such a case,' said another, 'it is good after all that we hold to the sorcerer and the Owl. 
Our kind are always better off with someone who has the upper hand.' 
'Sure,' said the newcomer. 'The Owl is the future. And we'll go up with him.' 
'You idiot,' said Zadarlik. 'Do you have sawdust in your head?' 

The black birds took flight. The flapping and squawking were deafening. They darkened 
the sky and began to circle the castle. 
'What the devil?' yelled one of the guards. 
'Open the gate please.' 
Boreas Mun suddenly noticed a strong smell of herbs – mint, sage and thyme. He 
swallowed and shook his head. He closed his eyes and opened them again. In vain. A skinny 
man, who looked like grizzled-looking tax collector, stood by his side and did not disappear. 
He stood smiling with his mouth closed. Boreas felt his hair standing on end, nearly lifting 
his cap. 
'Open the gate, please,' repeated the smiling man. 'Immediately. Believe me; it will be 
better for you.' 
Zadarlik dropped his spear which clattered on the ground. He stood frozen, his lips 
moving wordlessly. His eyes were empty. The others headed for the gate. They walked like 
unnaturally stiff puppets. They lifted the latch and opened both doors. Into the courtyard rode 
four riders. 
One had hair as white as driven snow and a sword in his hands which flickered like 
lightning. Behind him rode a blond woman who was drawing a bowstring. The third was a 
pretty young girl with a crooked sabre with which she slashed at Zadarlik. 
Boreas Mun picked up the dropped spear and raised it over his head. The fourth horseman 
loomed over him like a mountain. On his helmet stretched the wings of a bird of prey. His 
raised sword glistened. 
'Leave him, Cahir,' the white-haired man said sharply. 'Save time and blood. Milva, 
Regis, this way...' 
'No, not that way,' Boreas said, not knowing why he did so. 'Not that way... That way 
leads to a blind barbican. You have to go up the stairs to the top of the castle. If you want to 
save the Lady of the Lake... You must hurry...' 
'Thank you,' said the white-haired man. 'Thank you, stranger. Regis, did you hear? Lead 
the way!' 
After a moment there were just dead bodies in the courtyard. And Boreas Mun, still 
leaning on his spear. He could not release it. His legs were trembling. The jackdaws circling 
above castle Stygga were squawking and enveloped the towers and bastions like a black 
cloud. 
 
*** 
 
Vilgefortz listened to the report of the mercenary who had rushed in breathlessly, with a 
stoic and calm face. But his restless and blinking eye betrayed him. 
'Coming to her aid in the last minute,' he said grinding his teeth, 'I do not believe it. These 
things do not happen. Or only come to pass in bad plays in little theatres. Make me happy, 
my good man; tell me it is all a joke.' 
'I have not made any thing up,' the mercenary said indignantly. 'I'm telling the truth! A 
few people have broken... A whole gang...' 
'Okay, okay,' the wizard interrupted. 'It was a joke, Skellen, personally take care of this 
matter. You will have the opportunity to show me how much your army is really worth that 
you hired with my gold.' 
The Owl jumped up and waved his arms nervously. 
'Do not take this lightly, Vilgefortz,' he shouted. 'It seems you do not understand what 
threatens us! If someone is attacking the castle, they can only be Emhyr's people! And that 
means...' 

'It does not mean anything,' the sorcerer did not let him finish. 'But I know what you're 
doing. If my presence gives you courage, then you can stand behind my back. Let's go! That 
goes for you too, Bonhart!' 
Then he turned his terrible eyes on Ciri. 
'As for you, forget your pointless hope. I know well, who has so unexpectedly appeared in 
a theatrical attempt to save you. I assure you that I will convert this farce into a scene of 
horror. Hey, you!' He motioned for one of his minions. 'Put the girl in dimeritium, shut her in 
a cell with three bolts and do not open the door. Or it is your head. Got it?' 
'As you command, my Lord.' 
 
*** 
 
The entered a corridor, the corridor came to a large room filled with sculptures, a real 
lapidarium. Nobody was in the room, just a few servants that fled at the sight of them. 
They race down a flight of stairs. Cahir kicked down a door. Angouleme burst into the 
room with a war cry, her sabre knocking the helmet from an empty suit of armour that she 
had taken for a sentry by the door. When she realised her mistake, she broke out laughing. 
'Heh, heh, heh. Look...' 
'Angouleme!' Geralt shouted. 'Don't just stand there! Continue!' 
Opposite them was a door, beyond which they perceived silhouettes. Milva without 
thinking twice, tensed her bow and shot an arrow. Someone screamed and the door crashed 
shut. Geralt heard the sound of a bolt sliding home. 
'Come on, come on!' he shouted. 'There is no time to waste!' 
'Witcher,' Regis said. 'It makes no sense in running around blindly. I'll... I'll make a 
reconnaissance flight.' 
'Fly.' 
The vampire disappeared, as if the wind had carried him away. Geralt had no time to 
marvel. 
Again they met men, armed this time. Cahir and Angouleme rushed towards them 
shouting, but their opponents ran. More than anything, it seemed, thanks to Cahir's imposing 
winged helmet. 
They ran into a gallery surrounding an inner lobby. The door on the opposite side of the 
gallery was scarcely twenty paces away when the walkway on the opposite side was swarmed 
with people. Cries echoed. And arrows hissed. 
'Take cover,' cried the witcher. 
Arrows fell like a veritable hailstorm. The feathers hummed and the tips tore into the 
pavement raising sparks, and reduced the stucco walls to a fine powder. 
'Get down! Over the railing!' 
They fell to the ground, each with cover, behind decorative columns with carved floral 
motifs. However, not without injury. The witcher heard Angouleme scream. He turned and 
saw that she was holding her arm. From her sleeve blood was seeping. 
'Angouleme!' 
'It's nothing! The arrow pierced me cleanly!' the girl said, her voice trembling slightly, 
confirming what he had seen. If the tip had chipped a bone, Angouleme would have fainted 
from shock. 
The archers, launching their arrows from the end of the gallery, called for reinforcements. 
Some ran around the sides, looking for better shooting angles. Geralt cursed and calculated 
the distance to the archway. It did not look good. But staying where they were meant death. 
'We have to get the hell out of here!' he shouted. 'Listen up! Cahir, help Angouleme!' 
'They are going to mow us down!' 

'We have to go! There is no choice!' 
'No!' Milva exclaimed, rising with her bow in hand. She stood up and took a firing 
position. She looked like a statue, a marble Amazon with her bow. The archers in the gallery 
shouted. 
Milva released the bowstring. 
One of the archers flew backwards and smashed against the wall, and where he slumped 
to the ground, the red spot splashed to the plaster resembled an octopus. From around the 
gallery sounded a cry, a roar of anger, rage and horror. 
'The Great Sun...' Cahir whistled. Geralt squeezed his arm. 
'Let's go! Help Angouleme!' 
From the gallery, a shower of arrows fell upon Milva. The archer did not flinch when one 
arrow showered her in a cloud of plaster dust, or jump when marble fragments shattered 
around her. She quietly released the bowstring. A new cry and another archer collapsed like a 
puppet, spraying his fellows with brains and blood. 
'Now!' Geralt cried, watching the guards flee from the gallery, and fall to the floor, taking 
cover from the incoming missiles. 
Only the three bravest returned fire. An arrow hit the wall and dusted Milva's hair in lime 
powder. The archer blew a strand of hair from her eyes and readied her bow. 
'Milva,' Geralt called after Cahir and Angouleme had run to safety. 'Enough! Run!' 
'Just one more,' said the archer, with the feather of the arrow at the corner of her mouth. 
The bowstring hummed. One of the brave three screamed in pain, leaned over the rail and 
fell against the pavement of the patio. Seeing this, the other two faltered. They fell to the 
ground and huddled. Those who were rushing into the gallery were apparently reluctant and 
stayed in safe shelter from Milva's arrows. 
With one exception. 
Milva evaluated him on sight. Not very tall, dark complexion, brunette. With a glossy 
protector on his left forearm and a glove on his right hand. The girl saw that his compound 
bow was beautifully crafted, with a fitted handle and a curved staff as it tightened smoothly. 
She could she how tense the chord was as it crossed his swarthy face, she saw the arrow's 
feathers touch his cheek. She saw that he measured exactly. 
Milva readied her bow, strung it deftly, and aimed. The string came up to her face, one of 
the feathers grazed the corner of her mouth. 
 
*** 
 
'Harder, harder, Maria, to the mouth. Move your fingers on the bowstring so the arrow 
does not come loose from the notch. Let your hand rest on your jaw. Aim! Both eyes open! 
Hold your breath! Shoot!' 
The bowstring, despite her protector, painfully bit into her left forearm. 
Her father wanted to say something, but fell into a fit of coughing - dry, crisp, torturous. 
The cough was getting worse, thought Maria Barring as she lowered the bow. Worse and 
more often. He coughed yesterday, just as I aimed at a deer. And for lunch we had boiled 
cabbage. I hate boiled cabbage. I hate being hungry. And misery. 
The older Barring gasped and wheezed harshly. 
'You hit an inch from the center, oaf! A whole inch! I told you not to move or drop the 
bow! And you sit there wiggling as if someone had put a snail in your ass. And you spend too 
long aiming. You'll get weary hands, just shoot! Or you'll keep wasting arrows!' 
'I hit it! And not a whole inch, but barely half a span from the center!' 
'Do not argue! The gods punished me when they sent me you instead of a son and 
moreover, awkward as a boob!' 

'I'm not a boob!' 
'Well, show me. Shoot again. And learn from what I've said. No wiggling, like you're 
stuck in the ground. Aim and shoot without hesitation. Why are you crying?' 
'Because you scrutinize me.' 
'It's a father's right. Shoot.' 
 She tightened the bow. She was crying. He saw it. 
'I love you Maria,' he said softly. 'Never forget that.' 
She let go of the string, the feathers barely touched the corner of her mouth. 
Good,' said her father. 'Good, my daughter.' 
He began to cough in a terrible, rattling way. 
 
*** 
 
The black archer was killed on the spot. Milva's arrow struck him under the left arm and 
penetrated deeply, more than halfway down the shaft, shattering ribs, and smashing the lungs 
and heart. 
He fired a fraction of a second earlier and the red feathered arrow struck Milva low in the 
abdomen. It tore into her guts and severed an artery and shattered her pelvis. The archer fell 
to the floor as if hit by a battering ram. 
Geralt and Cahir cried out with one voice. Aware that the Milva was down, the archers in 
the gallery once again jumped up and fired a hail of arrows. One of the arrows hit Cahir's 
helmet. A second, Geralt swore, combed his hair. 
Milva left behind her a large, shiny trail of blood. In the place where she lay, in a blink of 
an eye, it had grown into a puddle on the floor. Cahir cursed, his hands were shaking. Geralt 
felt overwhelmed by despair. And rage. 
'Auntie!' howled Angouleme. 'Auntie, don't die!' 
Maria Barring opened her mouth, coughed horribly and spit blood down her chin. 
'I love you too, Dad,' she said clearly. 
And she died. 
 
*** 
 
Vilgefortz's shaved minions could not cope with the struggling and screaming Ciri. Some 
servants had to go to their aid. One received an accurate kicked that made him recoil, knees 
bent and clinging with both hands to his groin. 
But this only served to infuriate the others. Ciri received a punch in the neck and a slap in 
the face. She turned and another one gave her a kick in the hip and someone sat on her legs. 
One of the bald minions and a young man knelt on her chest, fingers tangling in her hair and 
pulling hard. Ciri howled. 
The minion also howled. Ciri saw blood drip from his bald skull, staining the white outfit 
with a macabre drawing. 
A second later the lab became a hell. The furniture as overturned with a crash. The 
strident pops and cracks from glasses bursting mixed with the hellish howls of the confused 
people. The decoctions, filters, elixirs, extracts and other magical substances spilled onto the 
tables and the ground, mixing and combining. Some, contacting, hissed and burst forth in 
clouds of yellow smoke. The room was immediately filled with a caustic stench. 
Amid the smoke and tears produced by the stench, Ciri looked in shock at the thing that 
moved about the laboratory. A black figure resembling a gigantic bat. She saw the bat hook 
the minions in flight and releasing them high in the air, yelling as they fell. Before her eyes, it 

snapped up one of the servants that was trying to get away and slammed it against a table, 
where he began to howl and shake, spraying blood on retorts, stills, beakers and flasks. 
A fluid from some broken container sprayed a lamp. It hissed, and the lamp exploded. 
Ciri had t dodge the fireball headed at her face. She clenched her teeth to keep from 
screaming. 
In the steel chair, which was prepared for her, sat a slender, gray-haired main in a black 
jacket. He gritted his fangs into the neck of a young minion, which rested on his knees and 
sucked his blood. The bald man groaned and his limbs twitched convulsively. 
Pallid blue flames danced on the tables. Flasks, retorts and stills exploded in the heat, one 
after the other. 
The vampire drew his fangs away from his victim's throat and look at Ciri with onyx 
black eyes. 
'The opportunity arises, he said, as if in explanation, 'when you just can't resist the drink.' 
'Do not fear,' he smiled where he saw her expression. 'Do not worry, Cri. I'm glad I found 
you. My name is Emiel Regis and I, although you may find it incredible, am a friend of the 
witcher Geralt. I came to this castle with him.' 
An armed mercenary ran into the burning lab. Geralt's companion turned his head towards 
him, hissed and bared his fangs. The mercenary screamed terribly. His scream soon faded 
into silence or the distance. 
Emiel Regis dropped the minion's body to the ground, stood up and stretched just like a 
cat. 
'Who would have thought?' he said. 'Such an insect, and yet he had great blood in him. 
This is what we call a - hidden quality. Let's go, Ciri, I'll escort you to Geralt.' 
'No,' Ciri said. 
'Do not be afraid of me.' 
'I'm not afraid,' she protested, bravely clenching her jaw so that he could not hear her 
teeth chattering in terror. 'No, because... Because Yennefer is imprisoned somewhere here. I 
have to find her as quickly as possible. I fear that Vilgefortz... Please, sir...' 
'Emiel Regis.' 
'Warn Geralt, good sir, that Vilgefortz is here. He is a sorcerer, a powerful sorcerer. 
Geralt has to be careful.' 
 
*** 
 
'You have to be careful,' Regis repeated his warning, staring at Milva lying motionless. 
'Because Vilgefortz is a powerful sorcerer. She went to free Yennefer.' 
Geralt cursed. 
'Come on,' he shouted, to wake up the spirits of his companions. 'Let's go!' 
'Let's go,' Angouleme stood up, wiping her tears. 'Let's go! We need to kick some ass!' 
'I feel in me,' the vampire hissed with a sinister smile, 'a power with which I could smash 
down this whole castle.' 
The witcher looked at him suspiciously. 
'I don't think so,' he said. 'But try and break through to the upper levels and stir it up and 
try and lure away some attention from me. I'll look for Ciri. She has not been treated well, 
vampire and you left her alone.' 
'She demanded it,' Regis explained quietly. 'In a tone that ruled out any discussion. I 
admit, I was surprised.' 
'I know. Go to the upper floors. And hold on! I will try to find her and Yennefer.' 
 
*** 

 
He found her. And it was fast. 
He met them out of the blue, totally unexpected when running around a corner in the 
corridor. He was met with a sight that made his blood boil and the veins stick out on the back 
of his hands. 
Yennefer was being dragged down the hall by a group of guards. She was ragged and 
bound in chains, but it did not prevent her from putting up a fight with her captors and swear 
at them like a porter. 
Geralt did not let them recover from their surprise. He slashed once and only once, a short 
economical movement of his forearm. A guard howled like a dog, turned on the spot and 
smashed his head into the plate armour statue standing in the hallway alcove; he slipped to 
the ground and smeared blood over the armour. 
His three companions released Yennefer and quickly backed away. But one grabbed the 
sorceress by the hair and held a knife to her throat just above the dimeritium collar. 
'Stay away!' he shouted. 'Or I'll slaughter her! I'm not kidding!' 
'Me either,' Geralt twirled his sword and looked the man in the eye. 
The man could not stand it; he released Yennefer and ran back to his companions. All of 
them had their hands on weapons. One of them took an antique halberd from the wall. They 
spread out into a semi-circular attack position. 
'I knew you'd come,' Yennefer said, straightening up proudly. 'Geralt, teach these ruffians 
what a sword in the hands of a witcher can do.' 
She raised her hands high, lifting the shackles. Geralt grasped Sihil in both hands, cocked 
his head slightly and took aim. He slashed. So fast that no one saw the blade move. 
The shackles fell with a clatter to the floor. One of the guards sighed. Geralt tightened his 
grip, moving his index finger under the hilt. 
'Don't move, Yen. Tilt your head slightly to the side, please.' 
The sorceress did not even blink. The sound of the sword striking metal was very faint. 
The dimeritium collar fell beside the chains on the floor. On the sorceress neck appeared 
on tiny drop of blood. She rubbed her wrists and laughed. She slowly turned to the guards. 
None of them held her gaze. 
The one with the halberd carefully as if afraid to break it, laid it on the floor. 
'With someone like that, he mused, 'the Owl can fight her in person. I value my life.' 
'We were ordered...' muttered another, retreating. 'We were ordered... The decision was 
not ours...' 
'We have never treated you badly, ma'am,' said a third, his mouth going dry. 'While in 
prison... Bear witness....' 
'Be gone,' said the sorceress. Liberated from the dimeritium, she stood erect with her head 
held proudly and in their eyes she appeared as a giantess. It seemed to them that her tousled, 
black mane touched the roof of the vaulted corridor. 
The guards fled. Hunched as if expecting an attack from behind, but none of them looked 
back. Yennefer returned to her normal size. She threw her arms around Geralt's neck. 
'I knew that you'd come for me,' she whispered, searching with her mouth for his lips. 
'That you'd come, even if...' 
'Let's go,' he said after a moment, gasping for air. 'Now for Ciri.' 
'Ciri,' she said and in her eyes for a brief moment blazed a fearsome purple fire. 'And 
Vilgefortz.' 
 
*** 
 

From around a corner a mercenary crossbowman jumped out, shouted and fired. He 
aimed for the sorceress. Geralt jumped as if driven by a spring and waved his sword. The 
arrow deflected and flew over the head of the archer, so close that he had to duck. He did not 
have time to stand again because the witcher jumped forward and skewered him like a carp. 
Further along in the hallway stood two other, who also had crossbows and fired them, but 
their hands were shaking so they did not find their mark. In the next moment, the witcher was 
among them and they both died. 
'Which way, Yen?' 
The sorceress focused, closing her eyes. 
'This way. After these steps.' 
'Are you sure that's a good way to go?' 
'Yes.' 
More mercenaries attacked them from just behind the corner of the hallway, near an 
ornate archway. There were more than ten and they were armed with spears and halberds. 
And they were determined and stubborn. Despite this, they went down quickly. 
Yennefer immediately struck one in the chest with a ball of fire. Geralt spun in a pirouette 
and fell among the others, his Dwarven Sihil flashing and hissing like a snake. When four 
more had fallen, then others fled, clanging and clattering along the corridors. 
'All right, Yen?' 
'Could not be better.' 
Under the archway stood Vilgefortz. 
'I'm impressed,' he said quietly. 'I'm really impressed, witcher. You are hopelessly naive 
and stupid, but your technique is really impressive.' 
'Your underlings,' Yennefer said calmly, 'just took off and left you. Give us Ciri and we'll 
leave you alone.' 
'You know, Yennefer,' sneered the wizard, 'that is the second generous offer I've had 
today? Thank you, thank you. And here is my answer...' 
'Look out!' Yennefer screamed and jumped. Geralt also jumped to the side at the last 
minute. A pillar of fire roared from the wizard's hands and burst through the place Geralt 
stood a moment before, hissing and burning the area. The witcher wiped soot and the charred 
remains of an eyebrow from his face. He saw Vilgefortz again raise his hand. He dodged and 
ducked behind a column. The boom popped his ears. The whole castle shook on its 
foundations. 
 
*** 
 
Echoes of the vast boom rolled through the corridors, halls and rooms of the castle. The 
walls trembled and rafters creaked. With a loud crack, a portrait with a heavy gilt frame fell 
from the wall. 
In the eyes of the fleeing mercenaries was an unspeakable fear. Stefan Skellen mollified 
them with a threatening glare and called them to order with a stern look and voice. 
'What is it? Report!' 
'Mister Coroner...' grunted one of them. 'This is terrible! They are demons... Every arrow 
kills one of us... Every slash sprays red blood... Death is coming for us... He butchered 
everyone! We lost ten men... Maybe more... Do you hear that?' 
The boom repeated, the castle trembled again. 
'Magic,' Skellen said through clenched teeth. 'Vilgefortz... Well, now we'll see who's 
who.' 
He approached another soldier. He was pale and covered with debris. For a while he was 
unable to bring himself to speak, when he finally spoke his voice trembled. 

'There... there... is a monster... Mister Coroner... Big black bat... Tearing at people's 
heads. Blood ran in streams! And he flew around and laughed... And his teeth!' 
'It could not carry the heads...' someone whispered from behind the Owl. 
'Mister Coroner,' Boreas Mun decided to speak. 'There are ghosts. I saw... young Count 
Cahir aep Ceallach. And he is dead.' 
Skellen looked at him but said nothing. 
'Lord Stefan...' Dacre Silifant mumbled. 'Who are we fighting here?' 
'They are not men,' moaned one of the mercenaries. 'They are demons from hell! A force 
no human can hope to stand against...' 
The Owl crossed his arms and stared at the mercenaries with an authoritarian and 
determined look. 
'Then,' he proclaimed loudly and clearly, 'we will not meddle in the conflict between the 
forces of hell! Let the demons fight with demons, sorcerers with sorcerers and vampires can 
crawl out of their tombs. We won't disturb them! We will stay here, quietly and await the 
outcome of the fight.' 
The faces of the mercenaries shone. The mood grew palpable. 
'These stairs,' Skellen said in a strong voice, 'is the only way out. We'll wait here. Let's 
see who tries to go down them.' 
From above came a terrible boom. They could smell sulphur and smoke even here. 
'It is dark in here!' the Owl shouted, loud and clear, to give encouragement to his troops. 
'Move, get some torches! We need light to shine on those stairs! Light a fire in those 
braziers!' 
'We have no fuel, Sir!' 
Skellen wordlessly pointed to the artworks on the wall in the hall. 
'The artworks?' a mercenary asked incredulously. 'We are to burn paintings?' 
'Why not?' said the Owl. 'What are you looking at? Art is dead!' 
The frames were broken down to chips and the images shredded. The well dried wood 
and the cloth saturated with varnish immediately caught flame. 
Boreas Mun watched. Already fully committed. 
 
*** 
 
A thunderous noise, a flash and the column from where they were hiding a moment 
before, crumbled apart. The core broke; the decorated column crashed to the floor and 
crushed a terracotta mosaic. From the side flew a hissing ball of lightning. Yennefer stopped 
it, uttering spells and gesturing. 
Vilgefortz walked towards them, his cloak billowing out behind him like dragon wings. 
'I'm not surprised by Yennefer,' he said walking. 'She is a woman, so she is 
evolutionarily lower and ruled by her hormones. But you, however, Geralt, you're not only a 
man who is inherently reasonable, but a mutant, exempt from emotions...' 
He gestured. Thunder. A flash. Lightning rebounded from Yennefer's shield. 
'But despite your better judgement,' continued Vilgefortz, passing fire from one hand to 
another, 'you demonstrate a remarkable consistency and know nothing. You constantly want 
to paddle against the current and piss into the wind. It had to end badly. Know that today, 
here; in castle Stygga, you have pissed into a hurricane.' 
 
*** 
 

Somewhere on the lower floors was furious fighting, someone shouted, screamed and 
then groaned in pain. Something burned, Ciri could smell the burning smell and smoke, a 
gust of warmer air was blown into her face. 
Something banged with such forces that even the roof trembled on its support columns 
and stucco showered from the walls. 
Ciri cautiously peered around a corner. The corridor was empty. She went quickly and 
quietly, flanked on both sides by statues in the wall niches. She had seen those statues before. 
In her dreams. 
She left the corridor and came face to face with a man armed with a spear. She stopped 
short, ready to jump and spin. But then realised that this was not a man but a woman with 
grey hair, skinny and bent. And she was not carrying a spear, but a broom. 
'There is a prisoner here,' Ciri said, 'a black-haired sorceress. Where is she?' 
The woman with the broom was silent for a long moment, moving her mouth as if 
chewing something. 
'And how would I know, my dove?' she mumbled finally. 'I'm here to clean.' 
She turned her back to the girl and began to sweep. 
'I clean and I clean and I clean,' she repeated to herself. 'And every time it just becomes 
dirty again. Just look at this mess, my dove.' 
Ciri looked. On the floor, she saw a wide, winding bloody smear. It ran for a few steps 
and ended at a wall, under a dead man. Nearby lay two more dead men, one twisted in his 
death throws, the second with outspread limbs. Next to them lay crossbows. 
'There is mess again,' she said taking a bucket and rag, dropping to her knees, she began 
to mop the floor. 'Such filth. And I used to get it clean. Will it never end?' 
'No,' said Ciri flatly. 'Never. Such is the way of the world.' 
The old woman stopped mopping, but did not turn her head. 
'I clean,' she said. 'Nothing more. By you, my dove, you should go straight and then left.' 
'Thank you.' 
The woman bowed her head lower and again wearily began to mop. 
 
*** 
 
She was alone. Alone and lost in a maze of corridors. 
'Lady Yennefer!' 
So far she had kept silent, fearing that yelling would attract Vilgefortz's people. But 
now... 
'Yennefeeeeeer!' 
It seemed to her that she heard something. Yes, definitely! 
She ran into a gallery and then into a great hall with high porches. Again she smelt the 
burning smell. 
Bonhart emerged like a spirit from a niche and hit her in the face with his fist. She 
stumbled, and he jumped on her like a hawk, grabbing her by the throat and pushing her 
against the wall with his forearm. Ciri looked into his pale fishlike eyes and felt her heart 
drop low in her chest. 
'I would not have found you, if you were not calling out,' he croaked. 'And how wistfully 
you called. Do you long for me so, my darling?' 
Still against the wall, his hand slipped behind her neck. Ciri tossed her head. The Bounty 
hunter bared his teeth. He slid hi hand over her chest, squeezing her breast, and brutally 
grabbed her crotch. The he released her and pushed, she fell to the floor. 
He threw a sword at her feet. Swallow. And she immediately understood what he wanted. 

'I would have preferred the arena,' he drawled. 'As a culmination, the final to your fine 
performances. The witcheress verses Leo Bonhart! Eh, people would pay to see something 
like that! Come on! Lift the steel and draw it.' 
She obeyed. But did not draw the sword from its sheath, she slung the belt over her 
shoulder so that the hilt was in reach. 
Bonhart took a step back. 
'I thought,' he said, 'that my old eyes would be comforted by what Vilgefortz was going 
to do to you. I was wrong. I need to feel how your blood flows down my sword. To hell with 
vile sorcery and sorcerers, destiny, prophecies and the fate of the world, defiling elder and 
younger blood. What does all this divination and witchcraft mean to me? Shit! Nothing can 
compare with the pleasure...' 
He did not finish the sentence. She saw his lips move and his eyes flash ominously. 
'I'll release the blood from your veins, witcheress,' he hissed. 'And then, before it gets 
cold, we will celebrate. You're mine. All mine. Raise your weapon!' 
The castle shook from a distant rumble. 
'Vilgefortz,' Bonhart announced gleefully, 'is making mincemeat of your valiant 
rescuers. Well, darling, draw your sword.' 
Flee, she thought, paralyzed with fear, flee to another place, to another time, far away 
from him. She felt shame. Run? Leave Geralt and Yennefer to their mercy? But common 
sense told her, dead I can do nothing to help them... 
She concentrated, pressed her fists to her temples. 
Bonhart immediately understood what was going on and rushed to her. But he reacted too 
late. 
There was a flash and a murmur in her ears 
I did it, she triumphantly. 
She immediately realised that the triumph was premature. She realised that she could hear 
angry shouts and curses. The failure was probably caused by the evil, paralyzing aura of this 
place. She had transferred, but only a small jump. She had not even gotten out of sight of the 
opposite end of the gallery. She was not far from Bonhart. But she was still beyond his reach 
and his sword. At least temporarily. 
Dogged by his roar, she turned and ran away. 
 
*** 
 
She ran along long, wide corridors, the dead eyes of the statues followed her. She turned 
once, then a second time. She wanted to get lost and confuse Bonhart; moreover, she was 
headed towards the sounds of battle. Where it was being fought, were her friends. 
She entered into a large, circular room, in the middle of which stood a marble plinth 
sculpture representing a woman with a veiled face, probably a goddess. The room opened 
onto two corridors, both quite narrow. She picked one at random. She chose the wrong path. 
'The girl!' roared one of the mercenaries. 'We have her!' 
There were too many of them to risk a fight, even in a narrow corridor. And Bonhart was 
probably close. Ciri turned and ran to escape. She entered the room with the marble goddess. 
And froze. 
Before her stood a knight with a large sword, in a black coat and a helmet adorned with 
the wings of a bird of prey. 
The city was burning. She could hear the crackling of the fire, could see the undulation of 
the flames, she felt the heat of the fire and the neighing of horses, the screams of the 
victims... Suddenly, there appeared a black bird flapping its wings, covering everything... 
Help! 

Cintra, she realised, returning to reality. And Thanedd island. He caught up to me here. 
He's a demon. I'm surrounded by ghosts and phantoms from my nightmares. Bonhart is 
behind me, and him in front. 
She could hear screaming and the pounding of boots. 
 The knight in the helmet with the feathers made a sudden move. Ciri overcame her fear. 
Swallow was yanked out of its sheath. 
'Do not touch me!' 
The knight stepped back and to Ciri's amazement she saw that his cloak hid a blond girl 
armed with a curved sabre. The girl slipped around Ciri and slashed with her sabre at a 
mercenary. The black knight, instead of attacking Ciri, swung a powerful slash and killed 
another mercenary. The other retreated into the hallway. 
The blond girl rushed to the door, but could not close it. She brandished her sabre 
threateningly and screamed, pushing the mercenaries from the portal. Ciri watched as one of 
the mercenaries stabbed her with a spear, she watched as the girl fell to her knees. She 
jumped forwards and swung Swallow, slashing the sword horrible across one the 
mercenaries, the Black knight ran forward. The blond girl, still on her knees, drew an axe 
from her belt and threw it, hitting one of the men in the face. Then she reached the door, 
slammed it and the knight bolted it. 
'Uff!' said the girl. 'Oak and iron! It will take them some time before they can get 
through that door!' 
'They will not waste the time, they'll seek another way,' said the black knight matter-of-
factly, the frowned suddenly, seeing the blood seeping from the girl's leg. The blond waved 
her hand, it was nothing. 
'We have to get out of here,' the knight took off his helmet and looked at Ciri. 'I am 
Cahir Mawr Dyffryn, the son of Ceallach. I came here with Geralt. To rescue you, Ciri. I 
know that it is unbelievable.' 
'I've seen unbelievable things,' Ciri said. 'You have come a long way... Cahir... Where is 
Geralt?' 
He stared at her. She remembered those eyes from Thanedd. Deep, blue, nice. 
'He is saving the sorceress,' he said. 'Here...' 
'Yennefer. Let's go.' 
'Yeah,' said the blond girl, knotting an emergency bandage around her thigh. 'We have to 
kick a few asses! For Auntie!' 
'Let's go,' repeated the knight. 
But it was too late. 
'Run,' Ciri whispered, seeing who was coming down the second passage. 'It is the devil 
incarnate. But he wants me and will not chase you... Go. Help Geralt...' 
Cahir shook his head. 
'Ciri,' he said mildly. 'I'm surprised at you. I cross the whole world to see you, and now 
that I found you, to redeem myself, to save you and defend you. And you want me to run 
away now?' 
'You don't know who you are dealing with.' 
Cahir tugged on his gloves, removed his coat and wrapped it around his left arm. He 
waved his sword and swung it until it whistled in the air. 
'I would know.' 
At the sight of the trio, Bonhart stopped. But only for a moment. 
'Oh,' he said. 'There was a rescue? Your friends, witcheress? All right. Two more or less, 
it does not make a difference.' 
Ciri suddenly thought of something. 
'Say goodbye to your life, Bonhart,' she cried. 'This is your end. Here is your match!' 

Undoubtedly she exaggerated. Bonhart caught the false note in her voice. He looked 
suspicious. 
'The witcher? Really?' 
Cahir swung his sword, standing in position. Bonhart did not waver. 
'Well, well, the witcher is younger than I believed,' he hissed. 'Look here, boy.' 
He opened his mail shirt. On his chest glistened three silver medallions – an eagle, a cat 
and a wolf. 
'If you're a real witcher,' the Bounty hunter gritted his teeth, 'know that soon your amulet 
will adorn my collection. And if you're not the witcher, you'll be dead before you can blink 
your eyes. It would be more sensible, in that case, to get out of my way and flee. I want this 
wench, I have nothing against you.' 
'Strong words,' Cahir said calmly. 'Let's see what else you can do. Angouleme, Ciri, 
run!' 
'Cahir...' 
'Go,' he said, 'help Geralt.' 
They ran off. Ciri helped the limping girl. 
'You asked for it,' Bonhart narrowed his pale eyes, as he did he twirled his sword. 
'Asked for it?' echoed Cahir Mawr Dyffryn aep Ceallach dully. 'No. It is my destiny!' 
They rushed towards each other and collided violently. The blades clattered against each 
other, the corridor carried the sound of steel banging on steel. 
'Not bad,' Bonhart gasped when they moved apart. 'Not bad boy. But you're not a 
witcher, that little bitch wanted to deceive me. It's your turn. Prepare to die.' 
'Strong words.' 
Cahir breathed deeply. The first encounter convinced him that his chances were slim. The 
old killer was too fast and strong. His only hope was that he rushed in order to chase Ciri, and 
clearly nervous. 
Bonhart attacked again. Cahir parried, cut, ducked, jumped, grabbed his opponent's wrist, 
pushed him to the wall and put his knee is his groin. Bonhart grabbed him by the face and 
slammed the hilt of his sword into the side of his head, once, twice, three times. Cahir 
blocked the third strike. He saw the flash of the blade and instinctively parried. 
Too slowly. 
 
*** 
 
There was a strict adherence to family tradition in the Dyffryn house that the body of a 
fallen relative was to be housed in the castle armoury and all the men in the family to visit 
and stay in an all day and night vigil. Women gathered in a remote wing of the castle, so as 
not to disturb the men, or distract them or interfere with their thoughts, with their sobbing and 
fainting spells. 
Among the nobility of Vicovaro, sobbing and tears were not seen even among the 
women. It was considered tactless and a great dishonour. But in the Dyffryn house there were 
different traditions and they would not change. And had no intention of doing so. 
At ten years old, Cahir's youngest brother, Aillil was killed in Nazair and was lying in the 
castle armoury, due to custom and tradition he was not considered to be a grown man. 
He was not invited to a gathering of men over the open coffin, but was not allowed to sit 
silent alongside his grandfather Gruffyd, his father Ceallach, his brother Dheran or his uncles 
and cousins. Understandably, he was neither allowed to mourn and faint in with his 
grandmother, his mother, his three sisters or his aunts and cousins. Small Cahir preferred 
running around the walls and fighting with his peers from families who came with their 
parents for the funeral, burial and ceremony. Cahir was devoted to making mischief by the 
walls. He fought with the other boys who claimed their older brothers fought the bravest at 
Nazair and not Aillil aep Ceallach. 
'Cahir! Come to me, my son!' 
On the porch stood Mawr, the boy's mother and her sister, Aunt Cinead var Anahid. His 
mother's face was red and swollen from mourning and it frightened Cahir. It shook him that 
even such a comely woman, such as his mother, could look like a monster because of crying. 
He firmly decided that he would never cry, ever. 
'Remember, my son,' Mawr sobbed, clutching her child to her breast so hard he could not 
breathe. 'Remember this day. Never forget who put your dear brother Aillil to death. It was 
those damn Nordlings. Your enemies, my son. Be sure to hate them. Never stop hating that 
damn nation of murderers!' 
'I will always hate, mother,' Cahir promised, somewhat surprised. First, his brother, Aillil 
had fallen fighting with honour. It had been a death worthy and enviable of a warrior. Why, 
then, spill tears for him? Second, it was no secret that Grandmother Eviva, Mawr's mother, 
came from the Nordlings. His father in anger more than once had called his grandmother 
"she-wolf of the North". Naturally, behind her back. 
But his mother now wanted... 
'I hate them!' he cried enthusiastically. I hate them all! And when I'm big and I have a 
real sword, I'll go to war and chop off their heads! You'll see, Mother!' 
His mother took a deep breath and began to sob. Aunt Cinead steadied her. 
Cahir clenched his fists, shaking with anger. Anger and hatred towards those who had 
wronged his mother, making her so ugly. 
 
*** 
 
Bonhart's blow smashed his temple, cheek and mouth. Cahir dropped his sword and 
stumbled; the Bounty hunter swung and slashed him between his neck and collarbone. Cahir 
fell at the feet of the marble goddess, his blood, like a pagan sacrifice, pooled at the base of 
the statue. 
 
*** 
 
Rumbling, the floor shook beneath their feet, a decorative shield fell to the floor with a 
crash. The corridor was filled with acrid smoke. Ciri wiped her face. The blond girl weighed 
on her like a millstone. 
'Faster... Run faster...' 
'I can't,' breathed the girl and sat down heavily on the floor. Ciri stunned, watched the 
blood oozing from her leg. She was pale as death. 
Ciri knelt and quickly took off her scarf and belt and tried to make a tourniquet. But the 
wound was large and deep, and very high on the leg, too close to the groin. The blood would 
not stop flowing. 
The girl grabbed her hand. Her fingers were as cold as ice. 
'Ciri...' 
'Yes.' 
'I am Angouleme. I did not believe... I did not believe that we would find you. But I 
followed Geralt... Because it was impossible not to follow. Did you know?' 
'I know. He is well.' 
'We found you... And I scoffed at Fringilla... Tell me...' 
'Don't talk, please.' 

'Tell...' Angouleme's lips moved slower and with more difficulty. 'Say, you're still a 
princess... In Cintra... I'll be rewarded, right? You'll make me... a Countess? Tell me. Do not 
lie... Can you? Tell me.' 
'Don't talk. Save your strength.' 
Angouleme sighed, suddenly leaned forward and rested her forehead on Ciri's shoulder. 
'I knew...' she said quiet clearly. 'I knew a whorehouse in Toussaint was a better idea.' 
It took a long time before Ciri realised that she was holding a dead girl in her arms. 
 
*** 
 
She saw him coming, watched by the dead eyes of the marble caryatids lining the arcade. 
She finally realised that escape was impossible that she could not escape him. That she would 
have to face him. There was no other choice. 
But she was still scared. 
She drew her weapon. Swallow's edge softly sang as she pulled it from the sheath. She 
knew this song. 
She retreated into a wide corridor, he followed her, holding his sword in both hands, 
blood trickled down the blade, heavy drops dripped onto the floor. 
'Dead,' he said, stepping over the body of Angouleme. 'Good. The boy also went down.' 
Ciri felt overwhelmed by desperation. Her fingers tightened painfully on the hilt. She 
retreated. 
'You lied to me,' Bonhart drawled. 'The boy had no medallion. But something tells me 
that here in this castle is someone wearing a medallion. There will be someone old Leo 
Bonhart will find near the sorceress Yennefer. But first things first, viper. You and me. And 
our engagement.' 
Ciri decided. She twirled Swallow and moved into position. She moved in a semicircle 
around him, going faster, forcing the Bounty hunter to rotate on the spot. 
'The last time,' he said, 'this trick was useless. Don't you know how to learn from your 
mistakes?' 
Ciri quickened her pace. The soft flowing movements of her sword were meant to 
disorientate and mesmerize. Bonhart turned and spun his sword. 
'This doesn't work on me,' he spat. 'I'm bored by it!' 
He took two quick steps to shorten the distance. 
'Music, maestro!' 
Bonhart jumped and launched an attack, Ciri dodged with a pirouette, jumped and landed 
safely on her left leg and immediately struck. Even before her blade hit Bonhart's, she was 
spinning around him and launching a smooth cut. She struck again, without expansion, from 
an unexpected and unusual bending of her elbow. Bonhart parried and used the momentum to 
attack from the left. Ciri saw it coming and with a slight bend of her knees she avoided the 
blade, but only by an inch. She went quickly on the attack, chopping and cutting. But Bonhart 
was waiting this time and deceived her with a feint. Unable to stop, and nearly off balance, 
Ciri was only saved by a lightning jump, but did not prevent the reach of Bonhart's sword to 
her shoulder. At first she thought that the blade had only cut through the padded sleeve, but 
after a moment she felt warm liquid run down her arm. 
The marble caryatids watched them with indifference. 
Ciri retreated, but he stayed behind her, stooped over and flicking his sword from side to 
side like a scythe. Like a Grim Reaper, Ciri had seen in a fresco in the temple. The dance of 
Death, she thought. He approaches like the Grim Reaper. 
She retreated. Hot, wet blood was running down her arm and onto her hand. 

'First blood to me,' he said, looking at the trail of drops, which had been left behind on 
the floor. 'Who will get the second, my princess?' 
She retreated. 
'Look closely. This is the end.' 
Bonhart was right. The hallway ended suddenly at an abyss. This wing of the castle was 
damaged and the floor had collapsed. Leaving of the structure – columns, timbers and beams. 
Downstairs on the ground was littered with debris. 
Ciri hesitated. She moved onto a horizontal beam, and kept retreating from him. 
Bonhart's eyes watched her every move. It saved her. Abruptly, he lunged at her, running 
across the beam, his sword flashing with cuts and feints. She knew his intention. One bad 
parry or any other error and she would lose her balance and fall down to the broken lower 
floor. 
This time Ciri was not fooled by his feints. Just the opposite. Bonhart skilfully cut from 
the right. Seeing her rival hesitate a split second, she launched a new blow to his right hand, 
so fast and strong that Bonhart rocked the beam. He would have fallen if not for his height. 
He stretched his left hand and caught hold of an overhead beam, keeping his balance. But he 
briefly lost his concentration. And for Ciri that was enough. She launched a powerful cut, 
straining her sword arm to its maximum length. 
He did not even flinch when Swallow's blade, with a whistle cut him from his chest to his 
left shoulder. He immediately struck back with such force that if Ciri had not jumped back, 
the blow would have split her in half. She jumped to an adjacent beam, falling into a kneeling 
position and raised her sword horizontally above her head. 
Bonhart looked at his shoulder and raised his left hand, down which already ran a scarlet 
trickle. He watched the drops falling down into the abyss. 
'Well, well,' he said. 'Now I know you can learn from your mistakes.' 
His voice trembled with rage. But Ciri knew him to well. He was calm, focused and ready 
to kill. 
He jumped onto her beam his sword twirling and rushed at her like a storm, running 
confidently, without hesitation, not even looking at his feet. The beam creaked and dust 
trickled downwards. He pressed her with blows, forcing her to walk backwards. His attacks 
were so continuous that Ciri could not jump or spin; she simply had to stop the blows and try 
to avoid them. 
She noticed a glint in his fish eyes. She knew what it was. 
He was trying to corner her against a pillar, pushing her like a spider under a trestle. 
Pushing her to a point where there was no escape. She had to do something. And suddenly 
she knew what. 
Kaer Morhen. The Pendulum. 
'You're not deflecting the pendulum, your deflecting yourself from it. You're intercepting 
its energy, which you need in order to deal a blow. Do you see?' 
'Yes, Geralt.' 
Suddenly, swift as an attacking snake, she counterattacked. Swallow hissed through the 
air and collided with Bonhart's sword. At the same time Ciri bounced and jumped to an 
adjacent beam. She landed, miraculously keeping her balance. She ran a few steps and lightly 
jumped again, back to the Bonhart's beam, landing behind him. He turned just in time, 
slashing almost blindly where she had landed. 
He missed her by a hair; the strength of the blow staggered him. Ciri struck like lightning. 
She slashed from a lunge and again fell to her knees. The slash was powerful and accurate. 
He froze with his sword at his side. She watched the long, straight, smooth cut on his 
jacket start to ooze blood. 
'You...' Bonhart shuddered. 'You...' 

He lunged at her. However, it was slow and clunky. She escaped by jumping back and he 
could not keep his balance. He fell to one knee, but it slipped off the timber because the wood 
was slick with his blood. For a moment he looked at Ciri. 
Then he fell into the abyss. 
She watched as he fell to the floor, raising a geyser of dust, lime and blood. She saw his 
sword fall a few feet away from him. He lay motionless, with arms flung wide, tall and thin. 
Badly wounded and quite vulnerable. But still scary. 
It took a while, but he finally moved and groaned. He tried to lift his head. He moved his 
legs. He moved his hands. He crawled to a pillar and leaned against its foot. He moaned again 
and probed his bloody chest and abdomen with both hands. 
Ciri jumped. She landed a few feet away in a crouch, as softly as a cat. She saw his fish 
eyes widen in fear. 
'You won...' he croaked, looking at Swallow's blade. 'You won, witcheress. It was a pity 
it was not in the arena... It would have been a spectacle...' 
She did not answer. 
'I gave you that sword, remember?' 
'I remember everything.' 
'Why me...' he moaned. 'You will not hurt or murder a defenceless man... You are too... 
noble.' 
She looked at him for a long time. A very long time. Then sent bent down, His fish eyes 
nearly popped out of their sockets. But she only tore the medallions from around his neck – 
the eagle, the cat and the wolf. Then she turned and walked towards the exit. 
He leaped at her with a knife in his hand, cunningly and treacherously. As quiet as a 
ghost. Only at the last moment, when his dagger was about to go into her back, did he 
scream. In it was all of his rage and hatred. 
She avoided the cowardly attacked with a half-turn and jumped away. She immediately 
shifted and struck, hard and strong, with her whole arm, strengthening the cut with a twist of 
her hips. Swallow whistled and cut with the tip of its blade. Bonhart clutched at his throat. Hit 
fish eyes bulged from their sockets. 
'I told you,' Ciri said coldly. 'I remember everything.' 
Bonhart stared at her wide-eyed. Then he fell. 
He fell backwards into the dust with billowed around him. He lay on his back, tall, skinny 
and a skeleton and squeezed his throat with all his might. But no matter how firmly he held, 
his life slipped out between his fingers and the layer of grey dust under his body grew wet 
and black. 
Ciri stood over him. Without saying anything. But ensuring that he saw. That this last 
image would be the image that accompanied him wherever he went. 
He looked at her with hardening eyes. He convulsively reared up, digging his heels into 
the ground. Then he gurgles like a funnel emptying. 
And that was the last sound he made. 
 
*** 
 
The stone walls trembled, beams cracked and glass poured from lead frames. 
'Watch out, Geralt!' 
He dodged again at the last minute. Brilliant lightning ploughed a furrow in the ground, 
the air hissed with colour, murderously sharp fragments from broken windows. Lightning hit 
the column, behind which the witcher hid. The column broke up into three parts. It broke 
from the roof and collapsed to the floor with a deafening crash. 

Geralt, lying flat on the floor, his head cupped in his hands, was aware of how miserable a 
shield this was from the falling debris. He prepared for the worst, but nothing happened. He 
jumped up and could see the glow of a magical shield around him, he realised Yennefer's 
magic had saved him. 
Vilgefortz threw a bolt of lightning at the other column behind which the sorceress was 
hiding. He roared furiously and a cloud of dust and smoke appeared. Yennefer deftly slipped 
between them and retaliated with her own flash of lightning, which bounced off of the wizard 
with no visible effect. He answered with a crushing blow that knocked Yennefer to the 
ground. 
Geralt wiped the dust from his eyes and attacked. Vilgefortz turned his eyes towards him 
and pointed his arm, and from his hands roared fire. The witcher instinctively swung his 
sword. The dwarven blade, covered with runes, shielded him and but the stream of fire in 
half. 
'Ha!' roared Vilgefortz. 'Impressive, witcher! What do you say to this!' 
The witcher said nothing. He was hit by an invisible battering ram, flew backwards, fell 
on the floor and slid until he found the base of a buttress. A pillar flew apart and again 
tumbled from the roof. This time he did not have Yennefer's protection. The heavy carved 
block struck him in the side, fortunately, not fully, but even so it hurt and completely 
paralysed him. 
Yennefer chanted spells and threw them at Vilgefortz one after another. However, none 
of them hit, and they all bounced harmless off of the wizard's magical shield. Vilgefortz 
suddenly spread his arms wide. Yennefer wailed in pain and started rising from the ground. 
The wizard clapped his hands together and his fingers started to shake and if squeezing a wet 
rag. The sorceress cried shrilly. And started to squirm. 
Geralt clenched his teeth in pain and rose to return to the fight. But he was overtaken by 
Regis. 
The vampire came flying from out of nowhere in the shape of a giant bat and rushed at 
Vilgefortz quietly. Before the sorcerer could raise a protection spell, Regis attacked his face 
with his claws; he missed the eye because it was so unnaturally small. Vilgefortz yelled and 
waved his arms in surprise. Yennefer freed from the spell, fell with a scream of surprise into 
a pile of rubble, blood spurting from her mouth and down her chin and breasts. 
 Geralt was already close. He raised Sihil ready to deal a blow. But Vilgefortz had no 
intention of surrendering. He pushed the witcher with a powerful surge of energy and 
attacked the vampire with a dazzling white beam, which passed through a stone pillar like a 
hot knife through butter. Regis deftly evaded the beam and returned to his usual form. He 
materialised at Geralt's side. 
'Be careful,' the witcher grunted, trying to discern what was wrong with Yennefer. 'Be 
careful, Regis...' 
'Be careful?' said the vampire. 'I? That's not why I came here!' 
With an incredibly long and fast leap he reached the wizard and grabbed him by the 
throat. His vampire fangs glistened. 
Vilgefortz scream with rage and terror. For a brief moment, it appeared this was the end 
of him. But it was premature. The wizard had an arsenal of weapons for every occasion. And 
against every opponent – even vampires. 
The wizard hands grasped Regis and heated up like red hot irons. The vampire screamed. 
Geralt also cried out, seeing that the wizard was literally tearing the vampire. He jumped to 
his friend's aid. But was too late. Vilgefortz pushed the vampire into a column, with both of 
his hands burning with white fire. 
Regis screamed. 

He screamed so loud that the witcher had to cover his ears with his hands. The remains of 
the windows shattered noisily. The column simply melted. And the vampire melted with it, 
turning into a shapeless stone. 
Geralt cursed furiously and desperately. He jumped forward and swung Sihil. The wizard 
turned and hit him with magical energy. The witcher flew the entire length of the hall, hit a 
wall on the other side and slid down it. 
He lay there gasping for air, like a fish out of water, wondering not what was broken, but 
what was whole. 
Vilgefortz walked towards him. In his hand materialised a six-foot-long iron rod. 
'I could reduce you to ashes with a spell,' he said. 'Or I could melt you into a glassy 
mass, as I did with that monster. But you, witcher, you deserve a different death. In combat. 
Maybe not a fair fight, but still.' 
Geralt did not believe he could stand up. But he did. He spat blood from his cut lip. He 
gripped his sword tighter. 
'In Thanedd,' said Vilgefortz, approaching him, twirling the rod, 'I settled for giving you 
a beating, in moderation, to serve as a lesson. But I can see that you have not learned 
anything, this time the beating with be thorough and I will not leave a healthy bone in your 
body. Nobody will be able to put you back together again.' 
He attacked. Geralt did not try to escape. He accepted the fight. 
The rod flashed and whirled, spinning around the sorcerer. Both opponents dodged 
around each other in a deadly dance. The rod flicked like lightning. Geralt managed to parry 
the hammering blow. Vilgefortz skilfully deflected. Each time steel meet steel it groaned 
pitifully. 
The wizard was quick and nimble like a demon. 
Geralt was fooled by a swing at his torso and a mock punch from the left – the opposite 
end of the stick hit him n the ribs. Before the witcher could get his wind back, he received a 
strong blow to the hip that almost knocked him down. He dodged a blow to the top of his 
head, but did not escape the stab at his stomach. He was thrown against the wall. He had 
enough presence of mind to fall to the floor. Just at the moment, the iron rod brushed his hair 
and it slammed into the wall raising sparks. 
Geralt rolled; the rod drew sparks from the ground right next to his head. A second blow 
came and hit his shoulder. The shock sent numbing pain and weakness down his legs. The 
wizard raised the rod. His eyes burned in triumph. 
Geralt clenched his fist around Fringilla's medallion. 
The rod fell. It struck the floor, a few inches from the witcher's head. Geralt rolled to the 
side and quickly got up on one knee. Vilgefortz jumped after him and swung again. Again he 
missed by inches. 
He shook his head unable to believe his eyes. He hesitated a moment. Then sighed, 
realising what was happening. His eyes twinkled and he leapt and swung his magical weapon. 
But it was too late. 
Geralt quickly slashed him across the stomach. Vilgefortz screamed, dropped the rod and 
took a few steps backwards. The witcher followed. Kicked him between the stumps of two 
columns and slashed his sword in a wide arc diagonally across the wizard's torso to his 
collarbone. Drawing blood. 
The wizard screamed and fell to his knees. He lowered his head and look at his chest and 
abdomen. For a long time he could not look away from what he saw. 
Geralt calmly waited with Sihil raised, ready to strike. 
Vilgefortz lifted his head and wailed shrilly. 
'Geraaaaaalt...!' 
The witcher did not let him finish. 

For a long time there was silence. 
'I didn't know...' Yennefer said, at last rising from the pile of rubble. 
She looked pitiful. Blood smeared her chin and chest. 
'I didn't know,' she repeated, meeting Geralt's puzzled gaze, 'that you knew how to cast 
spells of illusion. And you were able to confuse Vilgefortz...' 
'It was my medallion.' 
'Oh,' she said suspiciously. 'An interesting thing. But even so, we live thanks to Ciri.' 
'What do you mean?' 
'His eye. He did not regain full coordination. And often missed. Although I mainly owe 
my life...' 
She fell silent, looking at the remains of the melted column in which she could recognise 
the outline of a person. 
'Who was that, Geralt?' 
'A friend. I'll miss him very much.' 
'Was he human?' 
'He was an incarnation of humanity. How are you, Yen?' 
'Some broken ribs, a concussion, a bumped hip and a bruised spine. Otherwise, I'm great. 
What about you?' 
'I'm more or less the same.' 
Without emotion he eyed Vilgefortz head, lying exactly in the middle of the floor of 
mosaics. The sorcerer's little glassy eye watched them with mute reproach. 
'Nice view,' she said. 
'Nice,' he said. 'But it's not the first I've seen.' Can you walk?' 
'With your help, yes.' 
 
*** 
 
They met in a place where the corridors came together to form and arch. They met under 
the dead eyes of the statues. 
'Ciri,' the witcher said, rubbing his eyes. 
'Ciri,' Yennefer said, supported by the witcher. 
'Geralt,' Ciri said. 
'Ciri,' he answered, with a lump in his throat. 'I'm glad to see you again.' 
'Lady Yennefer.' 
The sorceress released herself from the witcher's arms and straightened with a 
tremendous effort. 
'What a sight you are, girl,' she said sternly. 'Look at yourself and how you look. Fix 
your hair! Don't slouch. Come to me.' 
Ciri walked, stiffly over to Yennefer. Yennefer smoothed her collar and tried to wipe the 
dried blood from her sleeve. She fixed her hair, revealing the scar on her cheek. She hugged 
her tightly. Very tightly. Geralt saw the sorceress's hands on Ciri's back. He saw the 
deformed fingers. He did not feel anger, grief or hatred. He felt only fatigue. And a great 
desire to be done with it all. 
'Mummy.' 
'My daughter.' 
'Let's go,' Geralt decided to interrupt, but only after a long time. 
Ciri sniffed noisily and wiped her nose with the back of her hand. Yennefer scolded her 
with a look and rubbed one of her eyes. Surely she had gotten a speck of powder in them. The 
witcher watched the corridor from which Ciri emerged, as if expecting someone else to come 
from there. Ciri shook her head. He understood. 

'Let's go,' he repeated. 
'Yes,' said Yennefer. 'I want to see the sky.' 
'I'll never leave you again,' Ciri said dully. 'Never again.' 
'Let's go,' said Geralt. 'Ciri help Yen.' 
'I don't need help!' 
'Let me help you, mother.' 
Before them was a staircase. Bathed in smoke and at the bottom flaming torches and 
braziers with fire. Ciri shivered. She knew those stairs. They had appeared in her dreams and 
visions. 
Below armed men were waiting. 
'I'm tired,' she said. 
'Me too,' said Geralt as he drew Sihil. 
'I'm tired of killing.' 
'Me too.' 
'Is there no other way?' 
'No, there is no other way. Only those stairs. We have no choice, girl. Yen wants to see 
the sky. And I want to see the sky, Yen and you.' 
Ciri looked at Yennefer, who if not for the railing she was leaning against, would have 
fallen down. She pulled out the medallions she took from Bonhart. The cat she hung around 
her neck, the wolf she gave to Geralt. 
'I hope you know,' the witcher said, 'it's just a symbol.' 
'Everything is just symbols.' 
She drew Swallow from its sheath. 
'Come on, Geralt.' 
'Let's go. Stay close to me.' 
At the foot of the stairs Skellen's mercenaries were waiting for them, clutching weapons 
in sweaty palms. The Owl with a quick gesture sent the first wave of attackers. The stair 
thundered with the sound of heavy boots. 
'Slowly, Ciri, don't rush. Stay close to me.' 
'I know, Geralt.' 
'And calmly, girl, quietly. Remember, no anger, no hated. We have to get out of here to 
see the sky. And those who stand in our way, they die. Do not hesitate.' 
'I will not hesitate. I want to see the sky.' 
They reached the first landing without obstacles. The mercenaries fell back before them, 
amazed and surprised by their icy calm. But after a moment, three men leapt forward, waving 
their swords. They died instantly. 
'Attack all at once,' the Owl shouted from below. 'Kill them!' 
Three more attacked. Geralt stepped forward, feinted at one, and cut another's throat. He 
spun and Ciri dashed under his right arm. The girl slashed a second mercenary under his arm. 
The third tried to escape by jumping over the railing. He did not make it. 
Geralt wiped a few drops of blood from his face. 
'Calmly, Ciri.' 
'I am calm.' 
Three more approached. A flash of swords, screaming, death. 
Thick blood trickled down the smooth stone stairs. 
A mercenary with a jacket with brass rivets rushed them with a spear. His eyes shone 
with narcotics use. Ciri, with a quick step, deflected the spear and Geralt slashed at the man. 
He wiped his face. They continued to walk, without looking back. 
The second landing was close. 
'Kill them!' Skellen shouted. 'Kiillllll!' 

Heave footsteps on the stairs. The bright flashing of a blade, a shout, death. 
'Excellent, Ciri. But calmly. Less excitement. And stay close to me.' 
'I'll never leave you.' 
'Do not strike from the shoulder; you can do it from the elbow. Be careful.' 
'I'm careful.' 
The brightness of a sword, a cry, blood, death. 
'Excellent, Ciri.' 
'I want to see the sky.' 
'I love you.' 
'I love you too.' 
'Watch out. It's getting slippery.' 
The flash of blades, screaming. They walked, overtaking the blood pouring down the 
steps. They continued down the stairs of castle Stygga. 
One of the mercenaries slipped on the bloody stairs and fell straight beneath their feet. He 
wailed for mercy and covered his head with both hands. They walked around him without 
looking. 
They reached the third and lowest landing and no one dared cross their path. 
'Bows!' Stefan Skellen shouted from below. 'Bows and crossbows! Boreas Mun was 
supposed to bring crossbows! Where is he?' 
Boreas Mun – the Owl could not know – was already quite far away. He rode straight to 
the east, with his forehead to the mane of his horse, galloping as fast as he could. 
Of the other men who were sent to get crossbows, only one had returned. When he fired, 
his hands shook and his eyes watered from fisstech. The first bolt hit the railing. The second 
one did not even hit the stairs. 
'Higher!' the Owl ordered. 'Get closer, you idiot! Shoot up closer!' 
The crossbowman pretended not to hear. Skellen swore, grabbed the crossbow, jumped 
up the stairs, knelt and aimed. Geralt immediately covered Ciri with his body, but the girl 
slipped past him and as the rope from the crossbow twanged, she was already in position. She 
twisted her sword into the upper quarter and the bolt hit it so hard it hung in the air a long 
time before falling to the ground. 
'Very good,' Geralt muttered. 'Very good, Ciri. But if you ever do something like that 
again, you'll get a spanking.' 
Skellen threw the crossbow aside. He suddenly realised he was alone. 
All of his men huddled at the bottom of the stairs and none were in a hurry to climb. 
There even seemed to be less of them. Some had probably run off. For crossbows – no doubt. 
The witcher and witcheress, calmly, without hurrying, walked down the blood slicked 
stairs of castle Stygga. The stood close to each other, shoulder to shoulder, beguiling the fast 
movements of their swords. 
Skellen stepped back. And did not stop retreating until he reached the bottom. When he 
was surrounded by his men, he realised how far he had come. He cursed helplessly. 
'Men!' he shouted, but his voice broke. 'Forward! At them at once! Follow me!' 
'Get them yourself,' growled one of them and raised his hand covered in fisstech to his 
nose. The Owl swung at his and he sprinkled white powered all over his face, sleeve and coat 
lapels. 
The witcher and witcheress passed another platform. 
'When they get down here, they will be easier to surround,' Skellen encouraged. 'Men, to 
arms!' 
Geralt looked at Cir and almost screamed with rage when he noticed silver threads among 
her grey hair. He restrained himself. This was not the time for anger. 
'Be careful,' he said flatly. 'Stay close to me.' 

'I'll always be close to you.' 
'Down there it is going to be tricky.' 
'I know, but we'll be together.' 
'We are together.' 
'I'm here with you,' said Yennefer, walking down behind them on the slippery stairs. 
'Together! All together!' shouted the Owl. 
The men who had run for the crossbows, quickly returned. Without the crossbows, but 
with horror in their eyes. 
From the three corridors leading away from the stairs came the roar and banging of doors 
being broken down with axes. And the sound of heavy boots marching. All of a sudden from 
the three corridors flowed soldiers with black helmets, shields and the silver salamander on 
their coats. Skellen's mercenaries, intimidated by their shouts and threats, threw down their 
weapons. Those who hesitated were threatened with crossbows and pikes. After a thundering 
call to drop all weapons, everyone listened, because they could see the black soldiers were 
burning for an excuse to do something. The Owl stood on a step and crossed his arms. 
'The miraculous rescue,' Ciri said in a whisper. 
Geralt shook his head. 
The crossbows and spears were turned in their direction as well. 
'Glaeddyvan Vort!' 
Resisting was pointless. 
Soldiers swarmed out of the mouth of the corridors like an army of black ants and both 
the witcher and the witcheress were very, very tired. But they did not throw down their 
swords. They carefully placed them on the steps. Geralt felt the warmth from Ciri's arm and 
could hear her breathing. 
Above, avoiding the corpses and spilled blood, came Yennefer. She showed the soldiers 
her empty hands and sat down heavily on the step next to Geralt and Ciri. The witcher could 
felt the heat on his other arm. It is a pity it we could not stay this way forever, he thought. 
And he knew he could not. 
The Owl's men were tied up and led away. Suddenly among the soldiers appeared the 
high ranking officers, recognisable by the white plumes and the silver trim on their 
breastplates, and by the respect that the other soldiers gave them. 
The soldiers before one of those officers, whose helmet had more silver ornaments than 
any other, parted with exceptional respect. Almost bowing. 
He stopped in front of Skellen. The Owl – it was clearly visible even in the flickering 
light of the torches and braziers – went pale as a sheet of paper. 
'Stefan Skellen,' the officer said in a voice that rang metallically around the vaulted 
room. 'I'll see you in court. You'll be sentence for treason.' 
The Owl was led out, but his hands were not tied. 
The officer turned around. Upstairs a burning tapestry tore itself from the wall, and 
floated down like a large fiery bird. The red flames gleamed on the silver ornaments on his 
helmet and his lowered visor, forged like all the helmets of the black soldiers into the 
monstrous form of a jagged mouth. 
Now it's our turn, thought Geralt. He was right. The officer stared at Ciri. His eyes shone 
through the opening in his visor, watching everything without missing a detail. Her paleness. 
The scar on her cheek. The blood on her sleeve and hands. The white streaks in her hair. 
Then he turned his eyes to the witcher. 
'Vilgefortz?' he asked in a sonorous voice. 
Geralt shook his head. 
'Cahir aep Ceallach?' 
Another shake of his head. 

'A slaughterhouse,' said the officer, looking at the staircase. 'A bloody slaughterhouse. 
We'll he who lives by the sword... At least you spared the hangman some work. You have 
travelled a long way, witcher.' 
Geralt did not respond. Ciri sniffed again and wiped her nose on the back of her hand. 
Yennefer again scolded her with her eyes. The Nilfgaardian noticed it and smiled. 
'You came from the other end of the world,' he continued. 'For her and her. If only for 
that, something should be done. Lord de Rideaux!' 
'At your service, Your Imperial Majesty!' 
The witcher was not surprised. 
'Find us a discrete chamber, where I can rest and talk undisturbed with Geralt of Rivia. 
During that time, please provide all available services and convenience to both ladies. 
Obviously under the constant watch of guards.' 
'As you wish, Your Majesty!' 
'Geralt, follow me, please.' 
The witcher rose. He looked at Ciri and Yennefer, wanting to calm them, wanting to 
warning them not to try any nonsense. But it was not needed – they were both extremely 
tired. And resigned. 
 
*** 
 
'You have come a long way,' repeated Emhyr var Emreis, Deithwen Addan yn Carn aep 
Morvudd, the White Flam Dancing on the Barrows of his Enemies. 
I don't know,' Geralt said calmly, 'yours appears to have been longer, Duny.' 
'You've recognised me,' the Emperor smiled. 'A lack of beard and a change of behaviour 
changed me completely. The people who had seen me at Cintra, and came to Nilfgaard to 
have audience with me, no longer recognised me. And you saw me only once, after all, 
sixteen years ago. I was so etched in your memory?' 
'I did not recognise you, you've actually change very much. I figured out who you are 
already, some time ago. Not without outside help and guidance, I guessed what role you were 
to play in family incest with Ciri. And in one of my nightmares I once dreamed of hideous 
incest. And here you are, in the flesh.' 
'You can hardly keep your feet,' Emhyr said coldly. 'And your impertinence is forcing 
you to be even weaker. I invite you to sit in the presence of the Emperor. I grant you the 
privilege of...life.' 
Geralt, with relief, sat. Emhyr stood leaning against a carved cabinet. 
'You saved my daughter's life,' he said. 'Several times. I thank you for that. On behalf of 
me and on behalf of my descendants.' 
'You leave me speechless.' 
'Cirilla,' Emhyr said ignoring the sarcasm, 'is going to Nilfgaard. In due time she will 
become the Empress. Like dozens of girls who become queens, without previously knowing 
her husband. Often times it without a good concept of the first encounter with their husband. 
Often they are disappointed by the first few days... and nights of marriage. Cirilla is not the 
first.' 
Geralt declined to comment. 
'Cirilla,' continued the Emperor, 'will be happy, like most of the queens I just spoke 
about. It will come with time. I will not demand love from her but will transfer it to the son 
that Cirilla will bear for me. Archduke and future Emperor. An Emperor, who will beget a 
son. A son who will be ruler of the world and who will save the world from destruction. So 
says the prophecy, whose precise content, only I know...' 
The White Flame thought for a moment and continued. 

'It is clear that Cirilla must never know who I really am. The secret must die. Along with 
those who know it.' 
'Sure' Geralt nodded. 'It could not be clearer.' 
'You cannot help noticing,' Emhyr said after a moment, 'the hand of fate in everything 
that has happened. All of it. Also in your actions. From the very beginning.' 
'Rather, I see the hand of Vilgefortz. It was he who sent you to Cintra, right? When you 
were an enchanted hedgehog? It was he who made Pavetta...' 
'You are shooting in the dark,' Emhyr interrupted abruptly, throwing his salamander 
cloak over his shoulder. 'You don't know anything. And you don't need to know. I did not 
ask you here to relate the story of my life. Nor to explain myself to you. The only thing you 
deserve is to ensure that the girl will come to no harm. I do not have any debts to you, 
witcher. No...' 
'You!' Geralt interrupted. 'You broke a signed contract. You broke your word! You lied! 
These are your debts, Duny! You broke your oaths as a prince, and you have debts as an 
Emperor. With imperial interest. For ten years!' 
'Is that all?' 
'That's it. Because that is all that is mine, nothing more. But no less! I had to introduce 
myself to collect the girl when she turned six. I waited on the agreed upon date, but you 
wanted to steal the child before that time. But the fates, of which you speak, have mocked 
you. During the next ten years you tired to fight destiny. Now it is your turn, you have Ciri, 
your own daughter, who you once shamefully deprived of parents and with whom you now 
want to shamelessly spawn incestuous offspring. You don't ask for her love? Pah, you don't 
have the right to her love! Between us, Duny, how can you look her in the eyes?' 
'The end justifies the means,' the Emperor said flatly. 'I do it for the future of the world. 
For its salvation.' 
'If you have to save the world like this,' the witcher lifted his head, 'this world would be 
better off disappearing. Believe me, Duny; it would be better to perish.' 
'You are weak,' Emhyr var Emreis said gently. 'Do not get excited, you look like you're 
about to faint.' 
He moved from the cabinet, pulled up a chair and sat down. The witcher's head was 
indeed spinning. 
'The Iron Hedgehog,' Emhyr var Emreis said calmly and quietly, 'was a way of forcing 
my father to cooperate with the usurper to the throne. After the coup, my father, the Emperor 
was deposed, imprisoned and tortured. He did not break; however, because the usurping 
Duke devised something else – before his eyes, he had a hired sorcerer turn his only son into 
a monster. The sorcerer also had a sense of humour. In our language, Emhyr means 
hedgehog. My father did not break then, so he was killed. I was driven by mockery and 
insults to the forest and chased by dogs. Fortunately they did not pursue me too fiercely, 
because the sorcerer botched the job, and from midnight until dawn I returned to human 
form, it saved my life. I was just thirteen years old. I knew several people on whose fidelity I 
could rely on. But even so, I had to flee the country. A crackpot astrologer called Xarthisius 
had read in the stars that the cure to the spell could be found in the North, beyond the 
Marnadal Steps. Later, as the Emperor, I gave him in payment for his services a tower and 
good equipment. At that time he had to work with borrow equipment. As for what happened 
at Cintra, you already know, and I won't waste your time. The truth is that Vilgefortz had 
nothing to do with it. First, I still didn't know him. And second, I still felt a deep aversion to 
sorcerers. To this day, I still do not like them. Oh by the way, when I reclaimed the throne, I 
apprehended the sorcerer who had served the usurper and who had turned me into a monster 
in front of my father. I, too, showed a sense of humour. The sorcerer's name was Braathens, 
which in our language is the same as the word "fried". Well, enough digression, back to the 

subject at hand. After the birth of Ciri, Vilgefortz secretly visited me in Cintra. He introduced 
himself as a confidant of those who remained faithful to me in Nilfgaard. He offered me his 
help and soon demonstrated that he could help. When I asked incredulously the motives for 
his actions, he did not deny relying on my gratitude. His plans were to win wealth and power, 
which the future Emperor of Nilfgaard would provide him – me. A mighty ruler who would 
rule half the world and raise offspring, who would dominate the whole world. The wizard 
bluntly admitted that he wish to achieve a high position. The he pulled out a scroll tied with 
snakeskin and acquainted me with the content. So I knew of the prophecy, I learned about 
the future fate of the world and I realised what I must do. And I have come to believe that the 
end justifies the means.' 
'Of course.' 
'Meanwhile, in Nilfgaard,' Emhyr ignored Geralt's comment, 'my business was on track. 
My supporter had gained more and more influence and had won a group of army officers and 
cadets over to our side and prepared for a coup. However, I was also imperative. In person. 
The rightful heir to the throne and imperial crown, the rightful Emreis of the Emreis lineage. I 
would be the flag of revolution. Between you and me, a lot of revolutionaries harboured a 
hope that that was all I would be. Those who are still alive still can't get over it. But I digress. 
I had to go home. It was time that Duny, Prince of Maecht and false prince of Cintra, claim 
his heritage. However, I had not forgotten about the prophecy. I had to go back there with 
Ciri. But Calanthe was very carefully looking over my shoulder.' 
'She never trusted you.' 
 'I know. I think she knew something about the prophecy. She would do anything to stop 
me and Cintra was in her power. It was clear, I had to go back to Nilfgaard, but in a way that 
no one would know that I was Duny and that Ciri was my daughter. Vilgefortz suggested a 
way. Duny, Pavetta and their child were to die, disappear without a trace...' 
'The faked sinking ship.' 
'Right. While sailing from Skellige to Cintra we had been driven by magic to the Sedna 
Abyss, where Vilgefortz pulled our boat into the maelstrom. I, Pavetta and Ciri would be 
close in a specially protected cabin and survive. The crew...' 
'They would not survive,' finished the witcher. 'Then began your journey over the 
corpses.' 
'It started a little earlier,' he said after a moment in a dully voice. 'When it became clear 
that Ciri was not on board.' 
Geralt raised his eyebrows. 
'Alas,' said the Emperor flatly. 'I underestimated Pavetta in my plans. This melancholy 
girl with downcast eye constantly watched me and my intentions. Just before leaving she 
smuggled our daughter back to the mainland. I raved. She, too. She had an attack of hysteria. 
In the scuffle... she fell overboard. Before I could jump in behind her, Vilgefortz pulled the 
ship into the maelstrom. I hit my head and lost consciousness. I survived only by a miracle, 
caught in the rigging. I woke up and bandaged up. I had a broken arm and...' 
'I wonder,' said the witcher coldly, 'what a man fells after murdering his wife?' 
'Worse than a mangy dog,' Emhyr replied promptly. 'I felt worse than a mangy dog, like 
a true scoundrel. Even the fact that I never loved her didn't change that. The end justified the 
means. However, I regret her death, I did not want it and I did not plan it. Pavetta died 
accidentally.' 
'You're lying,' Geralt said dryly, 'and it does not become an Emperor. Pavetta could not 
live. She would have denounced you. She would never let you do what you intend to do to 
Ciri.' 
'She would have lived,' Emhyr contradicted him. 'Somewhere else... Somewhere far 
away. There are many remote castles... perhaps Darn Rowan... I would not have killed her...' 

'Even for the purpose that justifies the means?' 
'Always,' the Emperor rubbed his forehead, 'you use a less drastic solution. There are 
always many options available.' 
'Not always,' said the witcher, looking into his eyes. Emhyr avoided his gaze. 
'Just what I thought,' Geralt nodded. 'Finish your story. Time is running out.' 
'Calanthe guarded her granddaughter like the apple of her eye. I could not even dream of 
kidnap... My relationship with Vilgefortz had cooled considerably, and I still held a grudge 
against other sorcerers... But the military and aristocracy were pushing me to go to war, 
encouraging me to attack Cintra. The nation needed living space and the vox populi would be 
considered this my test as Emperor. I decided to kill two birds with one stone. I would take in 
one fell swoop, Cintra and Ciri. The rest you know.' 
'Yes, I know,' said Geralt. 'Thanks for the chat, Duny. Appreciate you take the time, but 
let's not wait any longer. I am very tired. I've seen the death of friends who followed me here 
from the end of the world. To save your daughter. They did not even know her, except for 
Cahir; none of them had seen her. They came to save her because there was something in 
them that was worthy and noble. And for what? To find death. I don't think that is fair. And if 
anyone is interested, I'm not satisfied. Because a story in which good people die and the 
rogues live is bullshit. I have no more strength, Emperor. Call your men.' 
'Witcher...' 
'The secret must die along with those who know it, you said so yourself. You have no 
other way out. There are no other solutions. If I escape from prison I'll come for Ciri. It is the 
price I must pay and you know it.' 
'I know it.' 
'You can spare Yennefer's life. She does not know the secret.' 
'She,' Emhyr said seriously, 'would pay any price to take my Ciri. And to avenge your 
death.' 
'True,' said the witcher. 'I almost forgot how much she loves the girl. You're right, Duny. 
We cannot escape our destiny. I have a request...' 
'I'm listening.' 
'Let me say goodbye to both of them. Then I am at your disposal.' 
Emhyr stood up, walked to the window and stared out the dark portal. 
'I cannot deny this. But...' 
'Do not worry; I won't say anything to Ciri. It would hurt her severely, if I told her who 
you are. And I cannot hurt her.' 
After a long silence, Emhyr turned from the window. 
'Maybe I do have some debt to you,' he turned on his heel. 'Listen to what I have to offer. 
Once, long ago, when people still valued truth, honour and pride, they stood behind their 
words and feared only shame, it would happened that a person sentenced to death could 
escape humiliation by being handed a dagger or razor, and stepping into a tub of warm water 
and opening a vein. Do you think that...' 
'Command a tub to be filled.' 
'Do you believe,' the Emperor said quietly, 'that the Lady Yennefer would accompany 
you in the tub?' 
'I'm pretty sure. But I will have to ask. She has quite a rebellious nature.' 
'I know.' 
 
*** 
 
Yennefer agreed without hesitation. 
'Full circle,' she said, staring speculatively at her wrist. 'Uroboros is biting his own tail.' 

 
*** 
 
'I don't understand,' Ciri spluttered like an angry cat, 'I don't see why I should go with 
him! Why? Where are you going?' 
'My daughter,' Yennefer said quietly. 'This is your destiny. You'll see, it cannot be 
otherwise.' 
'And you?' 
'Us,' Yennefer looked at Geralt, 'a different destiny awaits us. Nor can it be otherwise. 
Come to me, my daughter. Hold me tight.' 
'They want to kill you! I will not allow it! After all, we have only just been reunited! This 
is not fair!' 
'He who lives by the sword,' Emhyr var Emreis said dully,' dies by the sword. They both 
fought with me and lost. But they lose with dignity.' 
Ciri, in three steps stood before him, Geralt silently gasped. He heard Yennefer sigh. 
Bloody hell, he thought, anyone can see it! Everyone in the Black Ones army will see it! The 
same attitude, the same sparkling eyes, the same gesture with her mouth, the way she crosses 
her arms over her chest. Fortunately she inherited her mother's ashen mane. But even so, 
those who aren't blind can see whose blood she is. 
'You,' Ciri said, directing an angry look at Emhyr. 'You won. And you think you won 
with dignity?' 
Emhyr var Emreis did not respond. He just smiled and eyed the angry girl. Ciri clenched 
her teeth. 
'So many dead, so many dead for this end? And they lost with honour? Death is an 
honour? Only a beast would think so. I have looked at death up close and have not become a 
beast. And it will never happen.' 
He did not answer. He looked at her, seeming to drink her in. 
'I know,' she hissed, 'what you are up to. What you want to do with me. I'll tell you now 
– I will not let you touch me. And if you do... I'll kill you. Even if tied up. When you sleep, 
I'll bite through your throat...' 
The Emperor with a quick gesture silenced the murmuring of his officers. 
'This will happen,' he drawled, not taking his eyes from Ciri, 'as intended. Say goodbye 
to your friends, Cirilla Fiona Elen Riannon.' 
Ciri looked at the witcher, Geralt made a dismissive motion with his head. The girl 
sighed. She hugged Yennefer and whispered together for a long time. Ciri then approached 
Geralt. 
'A pity,' she said quietly. 'It seemed that everything was beginning to improve.' 
'It seemed to be so,' said the witcher. 
They embraced. 
'Be brave.' 
'He will not have me,' she whispered. 'He will not have me, don't worry. I will escape 
him. I know a way...' 
'Do not kill him. Remember, Ciri. You cannot!' 
'Fear not, I didn't even think about it. You know, Geralt, I've had enough of killing. 
There has been all too much.' 
'Too much. Goodbye, witcheress.' 
'Goodbye, witcher.' 
'Don't cry.' 
'That is easy for you to say.' 
 

*** 
 
Emhyr var Emreis, Emperor of Nilfgaard escorted the witcher and the sorceress to the 
bath chamber, to a large marble bathtub filled with warm, fragrant water. 
'Goodbye,' he said. 'Take your time. I'm leaving, but I will leave people her to carry out 
my orders. When you are ready, call out. A Lieutenant will bring a knife. But as I said, do not 
rush.' 
'We appreciate it,' Yennefer said seriously. 'Imperial Majesty?' 
'I'm listening.' 
'I would ask you not to hurt my daughter. I do not want to die with the notion that she is 
crying.' 
Emhyr was silent for a time. A very long time. He bowed his head and leaned on the 
door. 
'Lady Yennefer,' he finally said, an unreadable expression on his face. 'You can be sure 
that I will not hurt yours and Geralt's daughter. I have trampled the corpses of people and 
danced on the barrows of my enemies. I thought that was all I could look forward to. But 
your suspicions are unfounded - will never be able to hurt her. I know that now. Thank you to 
you both. Goodbye.' 
He walked out of the bath chamber and quietly closed the door. Geralt sighed. 
'Should we undress?' he looked at the steam rising above the tub. 'I'd hate for them to 
pull me out as a naked corpse...' 
'I imagine it does not matter how they pull us out,' Yennefer pulled off her shoes and 
socks and with quick movement began to unbutton her dress. 'Even though this is my last 
hour, I will not bathe dressed.' 
She pulled her shirt over her head and jumped into the tub, splashing the water. 
'Well, Geralt? Why are you standing like a statue?' 
'Because I had forgotten how beautiful you are.' 
'You're very forgetful. Now, get in the water.' 
When he sat down beside her, she immediately threw her arms around his neck. He kissed 
her, stroking her waist above the water and under it. 
'Is this,' he asked for the record, 'the right time?' 
'For this,' she murmured, dipping one hand under the water and touching him, 'every 
time is appropriate. Emhyr repeated twice that we were not to rush. What better way to spend 
the last few moments we have been given? Why mourn and lament? It's not worth it. Why 
examine our consciences? It is stupid and trivial.' 
'That's not what I meant.' 
'Then what?' 
'If the water cools down,' he murmured caressing her breasts, 'then the cuts will be 
painful.' 
'For pleasure,' Yennefer dipped a second hand below the water, 'it is worth paying a little 
pain. Are you afraid of pain?' 
'No.' 
'Me neither. Come, sit on the edge. I love you, but I will not, damn it, dive.' 
 
*** 
 
'Oh, oh...' said Yennefer tilting her head so that he wet hair arched over her back. 
'Wow...' 
 
*** 

 
'I love you, Yen.' 
'I love you too, Geralt.' 
'It's time. Let's call.' 
'Let's call.' 
The called out. First the witcher called and then the sorceress after him. When they 
received no response, the shouted in unison. 
'We are ready! Give us the knife! Hey! Damn it! The water is cooling!' 
'Then get out of it,' Ciri said, peering into the bath chamber. 'They're all gone.' 
'What?' 
'Yes. They are all gone. Besides the three of us, there is not a soul here. Get dressed. You 
look awfully ridiculous naked.' 
 
*** 
 
As they dress, their hands began to tremble. Both of them. With utmost difficulty they 
dealt with the buckles, hooks and buttons. Ciri chattered. 
'They are gone. Except for ourselves. Each and every one of them. They took all the 
prisoners, mounted their horses and left. They left no one behind.' 
'They left no one?' 
'Nobody.' 
'Incomprehensible,' Geralt shook his head. 'I don't understand it.' 
'And nothing happened,' Yennefer cleared her throat, 'to explain this?' 
'No,' Ciri replied quickly, 'nothing.' 
She lied. 
 
*** 
 
At first, she had tried to appear fine. Erect, proud, head held high and her face impassive, 
while being pushed into the gloved hands of the Black knights, while throwing bold and 
challenging looks and those helmets which made her so afraid. No one was touching her now, 
after the officer with the silver ornament on his helm growled at his officers. 
She walked between two rows of soldiers who escorted her to the gate. Their boots 
stomped loudly, their chainmail clinked and their weapons rattled. 
After advancing a few steps, she looked back for the first time, a little time later; she did 
it a second time. She would never see them again anymore, she suddenly realised with 
terrifying clarity. 
Neither Geralt nor Yennefer. Never again. 
That awareness, in one fell swoop wiped away her fake mask of courage. Ciri's face 
contracted and contorted her eyes filled with tears, and her nose ran. The girl fought with all 
her might, but in vain. A wave broke the dam as the tears made an appearance. 
The Nilfgaardians in salamander cloaks looked on silently. And amazed. Some had seen 
her on the stairs covered in blood, had seen her talking with the Emperor. A witcheress with a 
sword, who was defying the Emperor himself. And now they were stunned, seeing a simple 
girl crying and sobbing. 
She was aware of their gazes. Their eyes were burning like fire, prickling her skin. She 
struggled, but to no avail. The more she tried to restrain herself, the more she cried. 
She slowed and then stopped. The escort also stopped. But only for a moment. A grouchy 
officer grabbed her with iron hard hands under her arms. Ciri glanced over her shoulder 
again. She offered no resistance. But wailed louder, more desperate. 

The Emperor, Emhyr var Emreis stopped, this dark man whose face had awakened 
strange and confusing memories. With a sharp order, he ordered he loose. Ciri sniffed and 
wiped her eyes with her sleeve. Seeing the Emperor approach he stifled a sob and proudly 
raised her head. Although at the time she realise how ridiculous she must look. 
Emhyr watched her for a long time. Without a word. Then he approached and reached for 
her. 
Ciri, whose reactions to such movements were to instinctively recoil, did not react this 
time to her surprise. Even greater was her surprise to find that the contact with this man was 
not distasteful. 
He touched her hair, as if to count the snowy strings. He touched her cheek, his fingertips 
running along the old scar. Then he hugged her, cuddling her close to his chest, stroking the 
back of her head. And she, shaking and crying uncontrollably, let him. 
'A strange thing, fate,' she heard him whisper faintly. 'Goodbye, my daughter.' 
 
*** 
 
'What did he say?' 
Ciri's face clouded. 
'He said, Va Faill, luned. In the elder speech – Goodbye, my daughter.' 
'I know,' Yennefer nodded. 'What happened then?' 
'Then... Then he let me go, he turned around and walked away. He shouted orders. And 
they all left. They passed me, quite indifferently, stomping, pounding and rattling in their 
armour, out the gate. I heard neighing and galloping. I'd don't understand. Although if you 
think about it...' 
'Ciri.' 
'What?' 
'Do not think.' 
 
*** 
 
'Castle Stygga,' repeated Philippa Eilhart, looking out from under her long eyelashes at 
Fringilla Vigo. 
Fringilla did not blush. IN the last three months she had been able to product a magic 
cream which acted on blood vessels. Thanks to that cream the blush on her face didn't show, 
and no one could know that she was ashamed. 
'Vilgefortz was hiding in castle Stygga,' Assire var Anahid confirmed. 'It is in Ebbing on 
the shore of a mountain lake whose name, my informant, a common soldier, cannot 
remember.' 
'You used the past tense,' Francesca Findabair said. 
'Correct,' Philippa took control again. 'Because Vilgefortz is dead, my dear colleague. He 
and his companions are dead. This service was provided by our good friend the witcher 
Geralt of Rivia. Obviously we underestimated him. We all do. We made a mistake. We all 
do. Some more than others.' 
All the sorceresses as if on command looked at Fringilla, but the cream was working 
reliably. Assire var Anahid sighed. Philippa slapped her hand on the table. 
'Although it may seem like an excuse,' she said dryly, 'our activities associated with the 
war and the preparation of the peace negotiations and the fact that the Lodge was not 
involved with the case and final solution of Vilgefortz, have to be considered as a failure on 
our part. Something like this must not be repeated, dear ladies.' 
The Lodge – except for Fringilla who was pale as a corpse – shook their heads. 

'At the moment,' Philippa said, 'Witcher Geralt is somewhere in Ebbing. Along with 
Yennefer and Ciri. We will need to consider how to find them...' 
'And the castle?' Sabrina Glevissig interrupted. 'Have you forgotten to do something 
about that, Philippa?' 
'No, I have not forgotten. If there is going to be a legend, one must have the proper 
version and one in our favour. I'll entrust this task to you, Sabrina. Take Keira and Triss and 
take care of it. See that no trace is left.' 
 
*** 
 
The explosion was heard in Maecht, the flash – because it happened at night – was visible 
even in Metinna and Geso. A series of earthquakes caused by the explosion were felt even 
further. In virtually all corners of the world. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Congreve, Estella vel Stella, – The daughter of Otto of Congreve, married to the old 
Count Liddertal. Upon the death of the latter, rapidly recovered, managed her inheritance 
most judiciously, amassing for herself a not inconsiderable fortune. Enjoying the esteem of 
the emperor Emhyr var Emreis (sic), she was considered a person of great importance by the 
court. While she had no official duties, it was generally believed that the emperor was in the 
habit of paying considerable attention to her words and opinions. Because of her close 
personal relationship with the young Empress Cirilla Fiona (sic), whom she loved like her 
own daughter, she was jokingly referred to as the "Imperial mother-in-law". She outlived 
both the Emperor and the Empress, and died in 1331; as to her huge fortune, it fell to distant 

relatives on the Liddertal side of the family, called the Whites; being stupid and short-
sighted, they squandered every bit of their inheritance. 
 
Effenberg and Talbot 
Encyclopaedia Maxima Mundi, tome III 
 
 
 

