Chapter Four 
 
 
The smell in the great pillared hall of Castle Montecalvo was a mix of old tapestries, smoky 
candles, and ten different kinds of perfume - ten specially compiled types of perfume that 
were used by the ten women around the oak table, seated in chairs with arms carved in the 
shape of sphinxes. 
Opposite Fringilla Vigo sat Triss Merigold in a bright blue, high-necked dress. Next to Triss 
sat Keira Metz, who remained in the shadows. Her large earrings held faceted citrines that 
flashed again and again with a thousand twinkles, attracting the eye. 
"Please continue, Miss Vigo," urged Philippa Eilhart. "We are in a hurry to hear the end of 
your story. And to take urgent steps." 
Philippa was - for once - not wearing any jewelry except a large cameo made of sardonyx 
that was fastened to her vermilion dress. Fringilla had heard the rumors already, she knew 
who had given her the cameo and whose profile it represented. 
Seated next to Philippa was Sile de Tancarville, in a dress of all black that sparkled with little 
diamonds. Margarita Laux-Antille wore burgundy colored satin and thick gold, without 
stones. Sabrina Glevissig, on the other hand, displayed a necklace, earrings, and her beloved 
finger rings - the onyx color matched her eyes and clothing. 
Closest to Fringilla were the two elves - Francesca Findabair and Ida Emean aep Sivney. The 
Daisy of the Valley usually looked regal, but today exceptionally so. Though neither her hair 
nor crimson gown displayed excessive pomp and her little tiara and necklace were made not 
of rubies, but modest, yet tasteful shells. Ida Emean, however, wore a dress of muslin and 
chiffon, which was decorated in autumnal shades and so fine and light that it waved around in 
the hardly noticeable breath of air the central heating produced like an anemone. 
Assire var Anahid aroused admiration, as usual in recent times, with her modest but 
distinguished elegance. Over the small, narrow neckline of her dark-green dress, the 
Nilfgaardian sorceress wore a gold chain and a single, gold framed emerald cabochon. Her 
manicured nails, which were painted a very dark green, gave the composition a truly magical 
touch of extravagance. 
"We are waiting, Miss Vigo," Sile de Tancarville said. "Time is short." 
Fringilla cleared her throat. "December came," she continued. "Then Yule, then the New 
Year. The witcher calmed down to the point where Ciri's name no longer showed up in every 
conversation. The monster hunting expeditions, which he regularly undertook, seemed to 
completely avail him. Well, maybe not completely ..." 
She trailed off. She thought she had seen Triss Merigold's blue eyes flash with hatred. But 
perhaps it had just been a reflection of the flickering candle flames. Philippa snorted and 
played with her cameo. 
"Please, there is no need for so much modesty, Miss Vigo. Here, you are among us. Among 
women who know that sex acts have purposes other than pleasure. We all use these means, 
when necessary. Please continue." 
"Even though he maintained the appearance of reticence, patience, and pride during the 
daytime," continued Fringilla, "at night he was completely under my power. He told me 
everything. He paid homage to my femininity, and extremely vigorously for his age, I must 
confess. And then he fell asleep. In my arms, with his lips on my breast. Looking for a 
replacement for the mother's love that he had never experienced." 
This time, she was sure it was not a reflection of the candle flame. Very well. Envy me if you 
please, she thought. Envy me. You have every reason to do so. 
"He was," she repeated, "completely under my power." 
 

*** 
 
"Come back to bed, Geralt. It is not even properly bright, damn it! " 
"I have an appointment. I have to ride to Pomerol." 
"I do not want you to ride to Pomerol." 
"I have an appointment. I've given my word. The steward of the estate will be waiting for me 
at the gate." 
"Your monster hunts are foolish and pointless. What do you want to prove by killing another 
monster from some cave? Your manhood? I know a better way. Come on back to bed. Do not 
you ride to Pomerol. At least not so soon. The steward can wait, is that not what stewards do? 
I want to make love to you." 
"Forgive me. I do not have time. I have given my word." 
"I want to make love to you!" 
"If you want to keep me company at breakfast, put something on." 
"You probably don't love me anymore, Geralt. Do you love me? Answer me!" 
"Wear that pearl-gray dress with the mink trim. It suits you very well." 
 
*** 
 
"He was completely under my spell, fulfilled my every wish," repeated Fringilla. "He did 
everything I asked of him. It was so." 
"We believe it was so," said Sile de Tancarville extremely dryly. "Please continue." 
Fringilla coughed into her fist. "The problem," she continued, "was his companions. The 
strange band that he named his company. Cahir Mawr Dyffryn aep Ceallach, who had seen 
me before and tormented himself to remember where. But he could not remember, because 
when I was last in Darn Dyffra, the ancestral home of his family, he was six or seven years 
old. Milva, who seemed to be a daredevil and proud girl, but who I twice caught hiding in a 
corner of the stables and crying. Angoul'me, a moody child. And Regis Terzieff-Godefroy. 
One type that I could not see through. The whole company had an influence on the witcher, 
one which I could not stop." 
Well, well, she thought, Look at them draw up their eyebrows. Look at them twist their 
mouths. Just wait. This is not the end of my story. You will hear of my triumph. 
"Every morning," she continued, "this whole company met in the kitchen, which was located 
in the basement of the palace of Beauclair. The chef liked them - who knows why. He always 
had something in store for them, so plentiful and so tasty that breakfast was usually two, 
sometimes even three hours long. I ate with them many times, alongside Geralt. So I know 
what kind of absurd conversations they used to hold." 
 
 
*** 
 
Two chickens walked around the kitchen, one black and the other colorful, gently scratching 
the floor with their clawed feet. They blinked at the breakfast company and picked up crumbs 
from the floor. 
Like every other morning, the company had gathered in the palace kitchen. The chef liked 
them, who knows why, and he always had something tasty for them. Today there were 
scrambled eggs, flour soup, stewed eggplant, rabbit pate, and veal sausages with red beets 
and goat cheese to top it all off. All of it was excellent and they ate quickly and quietly. Apart 
from Angoul'me, who only whetted her tongue. 

"I'm telling you, we should open a brothel here. After we've done what we need to do, we 
should come back here and set up a House of Pleasure. I've had a look around the city. They 
have everything. I counted nine barbers alone, and eight pharmacies. But they only have one 
whorehouse, and it's so small and shitty that I wouldn't even call it a whorehouse. No 
competition. We'll make it a luxurious brothel. Buy a multi-storey house with garden ..." 
"Angouleme, have mercy." 
"... exclusively for wealthy customers. I will be the Madame. I'm telling you, we will make 
the big money and live like the great masters. In the end, I will eventually be elected to the 
council, and then I will certainly not forget about you, because if they elect me, they elect 
you, and before you can provide yourselves ..." 
"Angouleme, please. Here, eat some bread with pate." 
For a moment there was silence. 
"What are you hunting today, Geralt? Hard work?" 
"Eye witnesses" - the witcher looked at his plate - "give conflicting descriptions. So it 
depends on whether it is a Molding, which is pretty hard work, or a Delichon, which is 
moderate, or Dudel, which is easy. Perhaps the work will even be too easy, because the last 
time the monster was seen was last year's Lammas. It may have absconded from Pomerol 
over the mountains." 
"If so, I wish him all the best," said Fringilla while gnawing on a goose bone. 
"What is up with Dandelion?" the witcher said suddenly, "I haven't seen him for so long that 
I draw all my knowledge of his activities from the satirical songs they sing in the city." 
"We know no more than you." Regis smiled with his mouth closed. "All we know is that our 
poet is on such familiar terms with the Princess Anarietta that he grants her, even in the 
presence of witnesses, a fairly familiar cognomen. He calls her his Little Weasel." 
"And he's right!" Angoul'me said with her mouth full. "That princess woman actually does 
kind of have a weasel nose. Not to mention all those teeth." 
Fringilla narrowed her eyes. "No one is perfect." 
"Forsooth." 
The chickens, one black and the other colorful, had become so bold that they began to peck at 
Milva's boots. The Archer swore and knocked them away with a powerful kick. 
Geralt watched her for a long time. Then he decided. "Maria," he said gravely, almost sternly. 
"I know that our conversations are not particularly serious and that jokes are not ordained. 
But you do not need to show us such a sour face. What is wrong?" 
"It's clear what's wrong," said Angoul'me. Geralt silenced her with a sharp look. Too late. 
"What the hell do you know then, eh?" Milva stood up abruptly, almost overturning her chair. 
"Damn you! You can kiss my ass, all of you, you understand me?" 
She grabbed her cup from the table, drank it, and then threw it to the floor without hesitation. 
Then she ran out of the room and slammed the door. 
"This is serious ..." Angouleme began after a moment, but this time the vampire silenced her. 
"The matter is very serious", he confirmed. "I would not, however, have expected such an 
extreme reaction from our archer. Such as one typically reacts when they get split up with, 
not when they do the splitting." 
"What are you talking about, damn it?" asked Geralt, unnerved. "Hey? Would someone mind 
telling me what this is about?" 
"The Baron Amadis de Trastamara." 
"The pockmarked hunter?" 
"The very same. He made a request of Milva. To join him on a three day hunt. He has invited 
her again and again for months ..." 
"The hunt" - Angoul'me brazenly flashed her teeth - "lasted two days. With overnight 
accommodations in a little hunting lodge, you know what I mean? I put my hand ..." 

"Be quiet, girl. Tell me, Regis." 
"He has formally and solemnly asked for her hand. Milva has rejected, apparently in fairly 
strong terms. The Baron, with the reason of youth, took her rejection to heart, was offended, 
and left Beauclair immediately. Milva has been running around ever since like she was 
poisoned." 
"We've been sitting here too long," muttered the witcher. "Too long." 
"And who says this?" The previously silent Cahir spoke up. "Who says this?" 
"Excuse me." The witcher stood up. "Let's talk about it when I get back. The steward of the 
Pomerol estate is expecting me. And punctuality is the courtesy of the witcher." 
 
*** 
 
After Milva's stormy departure, and after the witcher had also left, the rest of the company 
ate breakfast in silence. The two chickens ran around in the kitchen, one black and the other 
colorful, gently scratching the floor with their clawed feet. 
"I", Angoul'me finally broke the silence, as she lifted and passed a plate of toast to Fringilla, 
"I have got a problem." 
The sorceress nodded. "I understand. It will be okay. How long ago did you have your last 
menstrual period?" 
"What makes you say that?" Angouleme stiffened with a jerk that startled the chickens. 
"Nothing like that! It's about something completely different!" 
"So, go on." 
"Geralt wants to leave me here when he sets off again." 
"Whoa." 
"He says", snorted Angoul'me, "that he cannot bring me into danger, or some such nonsense. 
But I want to go with him ..." 
"Whoa." 
"Don't interrupt me, okay? I want to go with him, with Geralt, because with him I'm not 
afraid of being caught by the One-Eyed Fulk again, and here in Toussaint ..." 
"Angouleme," Regis interrupted her. "You are speaking in vain. Miss Vigo will listen to you, 
but she will do nothing about it. Only one thing you've said upsets her: the departure of the 
witcher." 
"Whoa" repeated Fringilla, turning to face him and narrowing her eyes. "Is that your favorite 
subject to allude to, Mr. Terzieff-Godefroy? The departure of the witcher? And when is he 
departing? May I ask that?" 
"Maybe not today or tomorrow," the vampire replied in a soft voice. "But certainly one day. 
Without hurting anyone." 
"I am not hurt," Fringilla parried coldly. "Assuming, of course, that you had me in mind. But 
what concerns you, Angoul'me, also concerns me. So I assure you that I will discuss the 
issue of leaving Toussaint with Geralt. I guarantee that the witcher will know my opinion on 
this matter." 
"Yes, of course you will," snorted Cahir. "How did I know that you would say just that, Miss 
Fringilla." 
The sorceress looked at him for a long time. 
"The witcher," she finally said, "Should not leave Toussaint. And no one who is well 
disposed towards him should persuade him to leave. Where could he go that is better than 
here? He swims in luxury. He has his monsters, which he hunts, earning quite a bit of money. 
His friend and companion is the favorite of the ruling Princess here, and the Princess herself 
also values him. Mainly because of the succubus that had plagued the alcoves. Yes, yes, 
gentlemen. Anarietta and all the well-born ladies of Toussaint are extremely pleased with the 

witcher. Because the succubus has indeed stopped its visits, as if cut off. The ladies of 
Toussaint have also put together a special bonus that will be deposited into the witcher's 
account with the Cianfanelli Bank in the near future. And multiply the small fortune that he 
already has there." 
"A very nice gesture on the part of the ladies." Regis did not lower his eyes. "And the reward 
is well deserved. It is not easy to cause a succubus to stop its visits. Trust me, Miss Fringilla." 
"Oh, I believe you. Speaking of which, are you aware that one of the palace guards claims he 
saw the succubus. At night, on the battlements of the Karoberta Tower. In the company of 
another ghost. Probably a vampire. Both demons were walking there, swears the guard, and 
they seemed friendly. Perhaps you know something of it, Mr. Regis? Can you explain it?" 
"No." Regis did not flinch. "I cannot. There are things between the heavens and earth that 
even philosophers cannot dream of." 
"Undoubtedly, there are such things," Fringilla confirmed with a nod of her black-haired 
head. "But with regards to the fact that the witcher is supposedly ready to leave - you must 
know more than me? Because, you see, he has not mentioned any such thing to me, and he 
usually tells me everything." 
"Sure," muttered Cahir. 
Fringilla ignored him. "Mr. Regis?" 
"No," the vampire said after a short silence. "No, Miss Fringilla, please rest assured. The 
witcher by no means gives us more affection and confidence than you. He does not whisper 
any secrets into our ears that he would hide from you." 
"How then" - Fringilla was quiet as granite - "can you make these declarations about his 
departure?" 
Once again, the vampire did not flinch. "Because it is like the youthful, charm filled 
expression of our lovely Angoul'me says: 'Eventually, there comes a time when you either 
have to shit or get off the toilet.' In other words ..." 
"Don't bother with the other words," Fringilla interrupted him sharply, "It was charming 
enough already." 
For a while there was silence. Both chickens, the black and colorful, walked around and 
pecked at what was left. Angoul'me wiped a smudge of red beet from her nose with her 
sleeve. The vampire played thoughtfully with a sausage link. 
"Thanks to me," Fringilla finally broke the silence, "Geralt has learned what few people know 
- Ciri's family tree and the secrets of its origin. Thanks to me, he knows these things that he 
had no idea about a year ago. Thanks to me he has information, and information is a weapon. 
Thanks to me and my protection from magical detection, he is protected from the enemy, 
including assassins. Thanks to me his knee no longer hurts and can bend again. Around his 
neck, he wears a medallion of my craftsmanship, which might not be as good as his original 
witcher's medallion, but nevertheless. Thanks to me and only me, he is ready for the spring 
and summer - he is informed, fed, healthy, and prepared to fight the enemy. If anyone of you 
here has done more for Geralt, given more to him, then he should say so. I'll willingly pay 
him tribute." 
No one spoke up. The chickens pecked at Cahir's boots, but the young Nilfgaardian ignored 
them. 
"Indeed," he said pointedly, "none of us has given more to Geralt than you, my lady." 
"How did I know that you would say just that?" 
"It's not about that, Miss Fringilla", the vampire began. The sorceress did not let him. 
"What's it about then?" She asked aggressively. "About the fact that he and I are together? 
About the fact that we have an emotional connection? About the fact that I do not want him 
to leave now? That I do not want him to decide based on guilt? The same feelings of guilt and 
atonement that drive you to depart?" 

Regis was silent. Cahir also said nothing. Angouleme looked around; she had obviously not 
understood much. 
"If it is written in the books of providence", the sorceress said after a while, "that Geralt will 
find Ciri, then it will happen. Regardless of whether the witcher sets off into the mountains or 
sits in Toussaint. Predestination overtakes humans. Not vice versa. Do you understand that? 
Do you understand, Mr. Regis Terzieff-Godefroy?" 
"Better than you think, Miss Vigo." The vampire turned the sausage link in his fingers. 
"However, you must excuse me, I do not accept that predestination is in some book, written 
by the hand of a great Demiurge, or the will of heaven, or the unalterable judgment of any 
providence. Rather, it is the result of many seemingly unconnected facts, events, and actions. 
I tend to agree with you that the predestination overtakes humans...and not only humans. 
However, I accept much less the view that it could not also be reversed. Because this view is 
a convenient fatalism. It is a paean to apathy and baseness on a feather bed and the charming 
warmth of a woman's womb. In short, to live in a dream. Life, Miss Vigo may be a dream, 
may end in a dream ... But it's a dream that you must actively dream. Therefore, Miss Vigo, 
the road awaits us." 
"Go ahead." Fringilla stood up, almost as violent as Milva had recently. "As you wish! Snow, 
cold, and predetermination await you on the passes. And the atonement that you so urgently 
seem to need. Go ahead! But the witcher is staying here. In Toussaint! With me!" 
"I believe," the vampire replied calmly, "You are mistaken, Miss Vigo. The dream you dream 
with the witcher is, I confess with a bow, magical and beautiful. However, any dream that we 
dream for too long becomes a nightmare. And from it we awake with a scream." 
 
*** 
 
The nine women who were seated at the large table in Castle Montecalvo stared fixedly at 
Fringilla Vigo. At Fringilla, who had suddenly begun to stutter. 
"Geralt rode on the morning of January eighth to the Pomerol estate. And he came back ... 
well ... on the eighth night, or on the ninth morning ... I do not know ... I'm not sure ..." 
"Keep it together" Sile de Tancarville gently requested. "Please, keep it together, Miss Vigo. 
And if any detail of the story is too embarrassing, then just move on." 
 
*** 
 
The colorful chicken ran around the kitchen, gently scratching the floor with its clawed feet. 
It smelled broth. 
The door opened with a bang. Geralt stormed into the kitchen. His windswept face displayed 
a blue bruise and purplish-black stripes of dried blood. 
"Come on, people, pack up," he announced without any unnecessary preliminaries. "We're 
leaving! In one hour, and not a moment later, I will see you all on the hill outside the city, 
where the column stands. With bags and baggage, in the saddle, ready for a long and difficult 
path." 
That was enough. It was as if they had been waiting for this message and had been ready for a 
long time. 
"Immediately," Milva cried, jumping up. "I'll be done in half an hour!" 
"Me too." Cahir let his spoon fall, stood up, and looked at the witcher carefully. "But I'd like 
to know what this is. A whim? A lover's quarrel? Or are we truly leaving?" 
"Really. Angoul'me, why are you making that face?" 
"Geralt, I ..." 

"Don't worry. I'm not leaving you behind. I've changed my mind. But you must be careful, 
brat; you must not leave my sight. Go on, I said, grab your saddlebags and pack. And 
individually, in order not to attract attention from the city to the column on the hill. We meet 
there in one hour." 
"Absolutely, Geralt," exclaimed Angoul'me. "Damn, finally!" 
In no time Geralt and the colorful chicken were all that remained in the kitchen. And the 
vampire, who was quietly stirring his broth with noodles. 
"Are you waiting for a special invitation?" Asked the witcher coldly. "Why are you still 
sitting here? Instead of packing the mule Draakula? And saying goodbye to the succubus?" 
"Geralt," Regis said calmly, taking a spoonful of soup from the tureen. "It will take me just as 
long to part with the succubus as it will for you to part with your black-haired girl. Assuming 
that you intend to say goodbye to her. But just between you and me: you can send the young 
people out to pack up their things with shouting and noise, but I deserve something more, for 
reasons of age. Please, grant me a few words of explanation." 
"Regis ..." 
"A statement Geralt. The sooner you start, the better. I'll help you. Yesterday morning, you 
met the steward of the Pomerol Winery at the city gate as agreed..." 
 
*** 
 
Alcides Fierabras, the black-bearded steward of the Pomerol Winery, who the witcher had 
met in the "Pheasantry" on the night before Yule, was waiting at the city gate with a mule; 
He, however, was dressed and equipped as they were travelling far, far away to the end the 
world, beyond the Solveiga Gate and the Elskerdeg Pass. 
"It really is not close," he replied to a snappy remark Geralt had made. "You, sir, come from 
the big wide world and think of our small Toussaint as a little hamlet; you think you could 
throw a hat from one boundary to the other. But you are wrong. The Pomerol Vineyard, 
where we indeed want to go, is a good ways away and we can be happy if we are there by 
lunch." 
"Perhaps," the witcher said dryly, "we shouldn't have arranged to leave so late." 
"Yeah, maybe." Alcides Fierabras stared at him and blew into his mustache. "But I didn't 
know you were one of the early birds. Because that is rare in nobles." 
"I'm not a noble. Let's be on our way, sir, we needn't lose any time in idle talk." 
"You took the words right out of my mouth." 
They rode through the city to shorten the path. Geralt initially wanted to protest - he was 
afraid of getting stuck in the crowded streets known to him. However, the steward Fierabras, 
as it turned out, knew both the city better and the days when there was no crowding on the 
streets. They rode easily and quickly. 
They rode into the market and passed the scaffold. And the gallows, decorated by a hanging 
body. 
"It's a dangerous thing" - the steward pointed out with a nod – "to forge rhymes and sing 
ditties. Especially in public." 
"Severe." Geralt instantly recognized what he meant. "In other places, the maximum penalty 
for libel is the pillory." 
"It depends on whom the libel is about, and if it is true", said Alcides Fierabras soberly. "And 
how it was rhymed. Our princess is kind woman and is loved by the people, but if someone 
provokes her ..." 
"Songs, as one of my friends likes to say, you cannot suffocate." 
"Songs, you cannot suffocate. But the singer, you can suffocate perfectly well." 

They crossed the city and rode out the Cooper's Gate, straight into the valley of the Blessure 
River, which cheerfully splashed and foamed in rapids. On the fields, snow lay only in gullies 
and depressions, but it was quite cold. 
A troop of knights passed them, certainly on their way to Cervantes Pass, to the border 
fortress of Vedette. The front of their shields and coats were very colorfully painted and 
embroidered with griffins, lions, hearts, lilies, stars, crosses, and other heraldic nonsense. 
Their hooves thundered, their banners fluttered, and their powerful voices sung an idiotic 
song about a thing or two that happens to a knight when he is awarded a bride. 
Geralt followed the party with his eyes. The sight of the knight-errants left him thinking of 
Reynart de Bois-Fresnes, who had just returned home from the service and was restoring his 
strength in the arms of his middle-class woman. Her husband, a merchant, hadn't returned 
home for days, probably held back by foaming rivers, forests full of wildlife, and other 
natural forces. The witcher could by no means imagine tearing Reynart from the arms of his 
mistress, but he honestly regretted that the contract with the Pomerol Winery wasn't set on a 
later date. He liked the knight and missed his company. 
"Let's ride, Mr. Witcher." 
"Let's ride, Mr. Fierabras." 
They followed the road up the river. The Blessure River twisted and meandered, but there 
were plenty of bridges, so they didn't need to make any detours. 
Steam rose from the nostrils of the horses and the mule. 
"Do you think the winter will last long, Mr. Fierabras?" 
"There was frost on Saovine. And the saying goes: "Frost on Saovine – better put your warm 
pants on.'" 
"I see. And your vines? Doesn't the cold harm them?" 
"It's been colder." 
They rode on in silence. 
"Look there," Fierabras pointed. "There in the valley lies the village of Fox Hollow. It's hard 
to believe, but their fields grow pots and pans." 
"What?" 
"Pots and pans. They arise from the bosom of the earth, of course, entirely naturally, with no 
human intervention. Pots and pans grow in Fox Hollow, as potatoes or beets grow elsewhere. 
All kinds and shapes." 
"Really?" 
"May I drop dead if it's not true. That's why Fox Hollow established a partnership with the 
village of Dudno in Maecht. For there, the earth blossoms with lids." 
"All kinds and shapes?" 
"You, Mr. Witcher, hit the mark." 
They rode on. Silently. The Blessure River roared and foamed over the stones. 
 
*** 
 
"And look there, Mr. Witcher. Those are the ruins of the ancient fortress of Dun Tynne. That 
castle has witnessed terrible things, if you believe the legend. Waltharius, called the Heavy 
Handed, tortured and viciously murdered his unfaithful wife, her lover, her mother, her sister, 
and her brother. And then he sat down and cried, no one knows why ..." 
"I've heard of it." 
"Have you been there then?" 
"No." 
"Ha. The legend has traveled far and wide. " 
"You, Mr. Steward, hit the mark." 

 
*** 
 
"And there" - the witcher pointed - "the pretty little tower behind the terrible castle? What is 
that?" 
"That? That is a temple." 
"For what god?" 
"Who remembers a thing like that." 
"Indeed. Who does nowadays." 
 
*** 
 
Around noon, they saw the winery. It was situated on the slopes of the valley of the Blessure 
River and covered by evenly cropped vines, now wizened and bald. On the summit of the 
highest hill, windswept towers rose towards the sky, belonging to the thick and round Castle 
Pomerol. 
Geralt noted with interest that the path leading to the castle was churned up by hooves and 
carriage wheels just as much as the highway. It was clear someone had been heavily using the 
road to the castle. He bit back his curiosity up to the moment that he saw a dozen huge, 
robust, canvas-covered wagons, like those used for long distance transport. 
"Merchants," said the steward in reply to his question. "Wine merchants." 
"Merchants?" Geralt was surprised. "How so? I thought the mountain passes are blocked by 
snow and Toussaint is cut off from the outside world. So how have the merchants reached 
here?" 
"For merchants", the steward Fierabras said profoundly, "there are no blocked passes or bad 
roads - at least not for those who take their job seriously. They, Mr. Witcher, have such a 
principle: When a goal beckons, a way must be found." 
"Indeed," Geralt said slowly, "an admirable principle, one which we should emulate. In all 
situations." 
"Without a doubt. But in truth, the fact of the matter is that some of the merchants have been 
stuck here since fall and cannot get out. But they don't hang their heads; they say 'Pah, now 
we will be the first ones here in the spring, before the competition shows up'. They call this 
principle: 'positive thinking.' " 
Geralt nodded. "One can hardly object to this principle. Though one thing still amazes me, 
Mr. Steward. Why are these merchants sitting out here and not in Beauclair? Is the princess 
not willing to grant them the right to hospitality? Does she perhaps have something against 
these merchants?" 
"Not at all", replied Fierabras. "The princess increasingly extends invitations to them, and 
they increasingly and politely reject them. And stay at the winery." 
"Why?" 
"They say that Beauclair is home to perpetual banquets, balls, feasts, revelry, and flirtation. 
They say those activities are just lazy, stupid, and a waste of time that could be spent thinking 
about business. They say you have to focus on what is really important. On the goal that 
beckons you, constantly. Incessantly. Without wasting any thoughts on frippery. Then and 
only then can you reach your goal." 
"Truly, Mr. Fierabras," the witcher said slowly. "I'm thankful for our common journey. Our 
conversations were very beneficial to me. Really." 
 
*** 
 

Contrary to the expectations of the witcher, they rode not to Castle Pomerol, but a little 
further onto the ridge behind the valley, where the next castle stood, a little smaller and much 
more neglected. This was Castle Zurbarràn. Geralt was looking forward to the prospect of 
getting to do something soon, because the dark, serrated battlements of ruined Zurbarràn 
looked like a textbook example of a haunted ruin, which was no doubt swarming with magic, 
marvels, and monsters. 
When they reached the courtyard however, instead of marvels and monsters he saw a dozen 
people at such magical pursuits as rolling barrels, planing boards, and nailing these boards 
together. It smelled of fresh wood, fresh mortar, a few less fresh cats, sour wine, and pea 
soup. The pea soup was served immediately. 
The wind and cold during their journey had made them hungry, and they ate quickly and 
silently. One of Steward Fierabras' subordinates in the company made it for them. It was 
served by two light-haired girls with braids a good three feet long. Both stared at the witcher 
so provocatively that he decided to eat as quickly as possible and get to work. 
Simon Gilka had not seen the monster. He knew its appearance exclusively from second hand 
stories. 
"It was black, ha, pitch black, and when it crawled across the wall, you could see the bricks 
through it. It was like a jelly, you know what I mean, Mr. Witcher, or maybe something like a 
glob of snot. But it had long legs, and a lot of them, eight or even more. And Yontek stood 
there, stood there and watched, until he finally wised up and screamed, 'Get away, Get 
yourself away!' and an exorcism too: 'Thee shalt croak, you son of a bitch!' And then the 
monster went darting! Whoosh, whoosh, up and away. Into the depths of the abyss and was 
gone. And the boys says: If there's a monster here, we want hazard pay, and if we don't get 
it, we'll complain to our union. Your union, I tell them, can go and ..." 
"When", interrupted Geralt, "was the monster was last seen?" 
"Three weeks ago. So just before Yule." 
The witcher looked at the steward. "You told me it hasn't been seen since Lammas." 
Alcides Fierabras blushed at the points that weren't covered by his beard. 
Gilka snorted. "Well, well, Mr. Steward, if you want to manage, you have to be around more 
often, you can't just sit at the office in Beauclair, polishing the chairs with your butt. I think 
..." 
"I'm not interested," Fierabras cut him off fiercely, "in what you think. Tell the story of the 
monster." 
"I've already told it. That's all there was." 
"There have been no victims? No one has been attacked?" 
"No. But last year a servant disappeared without a trace. Some said the monster dragged him 
to the depths and killed him. Others said that it certainly wasn't any monster, but that the 
servant had killed himself, because of debts and payments. The fact is that he played dice like 
the devil, and then he had a child with the miller's daughter, and she has since gone to court 
and the court ordered the servant to make support payments ..." 
"So," Geralt interrupted, "the monster hasn't attacked anyone? And no one has seen it since?" 
"No." 
One of the local girls pouring wine brushed Geralt's ear with her breast and winked 
encouragingly. 
"Let's go," Geralt said quickly. "There's no reason to dawdle and talk. Lead me to the cellar." 
 
*** 
 
Unfortunately, it turned out that Fringilla's amulet could not fulfill the hopes he had placed in 
it. Geralt had not believed for a moment that the polished chrysoprase could replace his 

silver, witcher's wolf medallion. Fringilla had not promised anything like that at all. 
However, she had assured him - with great conviction - that the amulet, once attuned to the 
mind of the wearer, could do different things, including warning the wearer of danger. 
But either Fringilla's magic had failed, or Geralt and the amulet had different views of what 
was dangerous and what was not. On his way to the cellar, the chrysoprase shrugged almost 
imperceptibly when a large orange cat ran in front of him, lifted its tail rebelliously, and 
defiled the yard. The cat must have received some signal from the amulet, because it jumped 
away and gave a penetrating meow. 
But when the witcher entered the cellar, the medallion started vibrating annoyingly, over and 
over, in the dry, neat, clean storage rooms where the only danger emanated from the large 
wine casks. Someone who lay down with no self-control and his mouth open under the casket 
might have been threatened with severe intoxication. But nothing more. 
On the other hand, the medallion did not flinch when Geralt left the still used part of the 
cellar, descended the stairs, and entered the long, deep tunnels. The witcher had long since 
realized that most of the vineyards of Toussaint had old mines below them. No doubt as the 
planted vines began to bear fruit and yield better profits, the exploitation of mines had been 
abandoned to create tunnels and corridors that could be used as wine cellars. The castles 
Pomerol and Zurbarràn stood on top of an old slate mine. It was swarming with tunnels and 
holes; it would only take a moment's inattention to end up at the bottom of a hole with 
broken bones. Some of the holes were covered by rotten boards that were so thoroughly 
coated in layers of shale dust that they were indistinguishable from the ground. The area was 
very dangerous so he needed the medallion to warn him. It didn't. 
It didn't even warn him when an indistinct gray figure jumped out from a pile of slate rubble 
ten steps in front of Geralt, kicked up dust with its claws and wildly wringing legs, gave a 
piercing wail, ran down the tunnel whistling and giggling, and disappeared into a gaping hole 
in the wall. 
The witcher cursed. The magic trinket reacted to orange cats, but it didn't respond to 
Gremlins. I'll have to talk with Fringilla about it, he thought as he walked towards the hole 
where the little creature had disappeared. 
The amulet twitched vigorously. 
A bit late, he thought. But immediately afterwards he thought better of it. Perhaps the 
medallion was not so stupid. The usual tactic of Gremlins was to flee and then ambush their 
pursuers with a blow from its sickle-sharp claws. The Gremlin waiting in the dark - that was 
what the medallion signaled. 
He waited and waited, holding his breath, pricking his ears alert. The amulet was quiet and 
lifeless on his chest. A dull, unpleasant odor emanated from the hole. But it was dead silent. 
And no Gremlin would have stayed silent for so long. 
Without thinking, he ducked into the hole and crawled on all fours, scraping his back against 
the rough rock. He did not travel very far. 
Something began to creak and snapped. Then the floor gave way and down fell the witcher - 
along with several hundred pounds of dust and debris. Luckily he didn't fall for long - it was 
not a bottomless pit, but a normal dungeon. He shot out like shit from the sewer pipe and 
smashed into a pile of rotten wood. He spit something out, shook the dust from his hair, and 
swore very blasphemously. The amulet shook incessantly, it trembled on his chest like a 
sparrow inserted under his shirt. The witcher resisted the impulse to tear it off and throw it 
away into the darkness, never to seen again. First, Fringilla would have been furious. Second, 
the chrysoprase was supposed to have other magical properties. Geralt hoped it would be 
more reliable at the others. 
As he started to stand, he groped a round skull. And he realized that what he had crashed into 
was by no means a pile of wood. 

He stood up and quickly studied the pile of bones. They were all human. All these people 
were in chains at the moment of their deaths, and had most likely been naked. Their bones 
were crushed and chewed. They might have already been dead when they were bitten. But he 
was not sure. 
A corridor led out of the tunnel, long and straight. The slate wall had been processed very 
smoothly – it no longer looked like a mine. 
It ended suddenly in a huge cavity, whose ceiling sank in the obscure darkness. The center of 
the cavern was a huge, black, bottomless pit, above which hung a dangerous, delicate-
looking, stone bridge. 
Water dripped from the walls, echoing. A cold stench blew from the abyss. The amulet was 
quiet. Geralt stepped onto the bridge, alert and focused, trying to stay away from the 
crumbling balustrades. 
After the bridge came another corridor. On the smooth processed walls, he noticed rusted 
torch brackets. There were also niches here; some were filled with small statues made of 
sandstone, but over the years the dripping water had worn them down to shapeless boulders. 
Plates and reliefs had also been inserted into the walls. He was able to identify this sturdier 
material better. Geralt saw a woman with a horned moon, a tower, a swallow, a boar, a 
dolphin, and a unicorn. 
He heard a voice. 
He stopped and held his breath. 
The amulet twitched. 
No, it was no illusion; it wasn't the crunch of slate rubble or the echo of dripping water. It 
was a human voice. Geralt closed his eyes and strained his hearing. He tried to pinpoint the 
noise. 
The witcher could have sworn that the voice came from the next niche, from behind a statue 
that was worn down, but not so much that it had lost the rounded shape of a woman. It stood 
equal to the height of his medallion. It flashed, and Geralt suddenly noticed a reflection in the 
wall. He vigorously hugged the woman with his arms, and sharply turned her. It creaked, then 
the whole niche turned on a steel hinge and revealed a spiral staircase. 
The voice sounded again, from the top of the stairs. Geralt did not hesitate. 
At the top he found a door that opened without any resistance, not even squeak. Behind the 
door was a small room with a vaulted ceiling. Four enormous brass tubes towered on the 
walls, their ends were expanded like trumpets. In the middle, between the openings of the 
tubes, stood an armchair, and on that armchair sat a skeleton. On its skull, slid down to its 
teeth, hung the remains of a beret. Its body carried fragments of once-rich clothes, now eaten 
away. Around its neck hung a gold chain. Its feet rested in high topped boots, strongly 
corroded by rats. 
 From one of the tubes came a sneeze, so loud and unexpected that the witcher almost 
jumped. Then someone blew their nose, and the amplified sound from the brass tube was 
downright hellish. 
"Bless you", came out of the tube. "That was some sneeze, Skellen." 
Geralt moved the skeleton out of the chair, without forgetting to first remove its gold chain 
and stick it in his pocket. Then he sat down at the listening space. At the opening of the tube. 
 
*** 
 
One of the men Geralt was eavesdropping on had a bass voice, deep and booming. When he 
spoke, the brass tube actually vibrated. 
"That was some sneeze, Skellen. Where did you get such a cold? And when?" 

"Not worth talking about", said the sneezer. "Some damned disease has caught me and 
adheres. As soon as I get rid of it, it comes right back. Not even magic helps." 
"Maybe you should change magicians?" Said the next voice, creaking like a rusty hinge. 
"Truly, this Vilgefortz can't yet point to any particularly great successes. I think ..." 
"Forget it," interjected one who stretched his syllables in a characteristic way. "That is not the 
reason we have organized this meeting here in Toussaint. In the middle of nowhere, in the ass 
of the world." 
"This ass of the world," said the sneezer, "is the only country I know of that does not have its 
own security service. The only corner of the empire that is not riddled with agents of Vattier 
de Rideaux. This principality is seen by all as a hilarious and perpetually drunken state 
operetta, which nobody takes seriously." 
"Such little countries," said the syllable stretcher, "have always been havens for spies, and 
their preferred venues. Therefore, they attract counterintelligence service and spies, 
eavesdroppers, and all sorts of private detectives." 
"That may have once been the case." said the sneezer "But not under the rule of a woman, 
which has lasted for almost one hundred years in Toussaint. I repeat, we are safe here. Here, 
no one will track us down or overhear us. We can act as merchants and calmly discuss the 
questions that are of vital interest for your princely graces. For your personal assets and 
estates." 
"Truly, I hate private interests!" ranted the creaking. "We are not here for personal reasons! I 
am concerned solely about the good of the Empire. And the good of the Empire, gentlemen, 
is in a strong dynasty! Therefore, it would be a great evil and harmful for the kingdom if any 
mongrel, any spoiled scion of bad blood ascends the throne, a descendant of the physically 
sick and morally inferior kings. No, gentlemen! I, a De Wette of the family De Wette, will 
not stand by idly and watch! In addition, my daughter was promised ..." 
"Your daughter, De Wette?" roared the booming bass voice. "And what about me? I, who at 
the time supported Emhyr in the fight against the usurper? It was my residence from which 
the cadets launched their assault on the palace! And what did that earn me! At that time, the 
swindler looked at my little Eilan, smiled graciously at her, complimented her, and took her 
behind a curtain, I know, to feel her tits. And now what - another empress! Such an affront? 
Such shame? The emperor of the eternal empire, who prefers the daughters of Cintra to those 
of the ancient families! What? He sits on the throne by my grace and dares to reject my 
Eilan? No, I will not tolerate it!" 
"Nor I," cried another voice, high and exalted. "He has disrespected me, too! Leaving my 
wife for this Cintran nobody!" 
"By a lucky coincidence," said the syllable stretcher, "the nobody has been promoted into the 
afterlife. As follows the report of Mr. Skellen." 
"I've listened to this report very attentively," said the creaky, "and I've concluded it follows 
that the nobody has simply disappeared. And if she has simply disappeared, then she may yet 
reappear. Because she disappeared and reappeared several times last year! Truly, Mr. Skellen, 
you have disappointed us. You and your magician, this Vilgefortz!" 
"But now is not the right moment, Joachim!" said the bass "Now is not the time to blame 
each other and to accuse, to drive wedges between us! We must be strong and united. And 
determined. Therefore, it is unimportant whether the Cintran is alive or not. An emperor who 
insults the old families with impunity once, will continue to do so in the future! The Cintran 
has disappeared? Then in a few months he can present an empress of Zerrikanian or 
Sangwebarian origin! No, by the Great Sun, we cannot let him!" 
"Truly, we cannot! Right you are, Ardal!" said the creaky. "The Emreis dynasty has been a 
disappointment ever since they took the throne. Each moment Emhyr sits on the throne does 

the empire harm, truly. And there is someone else who could sit the throne. The young 
Voorhis ..." 
A loud sneeze rang out like a trumpet. 
"Constitutional monarchy", said the sneezer. "It is high time for a constitutional monarchy, a 
progressive order. And then democracy ... a government of the people ..." 
"Emperor Voorhis," repeated the bass voice with emphasis. "Emperor Voorhis, Stefan 
Skellen. He will be married with my daughter Eilan, or with one of Joachim's. And then I will 
be the Chancellor of the Crown and De Wette will be the Field Marshal. And you, Stefan - 
the Foreign Minister and a count. If you abandon your idea of granting titles and offices to 
the peasants. What?" 
"Forgot about historical development," the sneezer's voice said soothingly. "For the moment, 
at least. First, let me draw Your Excellency Chancellor aep Dahy's attention to the person of 
Prince Voorhis - mainly the fact that he is a man of iron character, proud and stubborn, who 
will be difficult to influence." 
"If I can make a comment," the syllable stretcher came forward to speak. "Prince Voorhis has 
a son, the little Morvran. He is a far better candidate. First, he has a better claim to the throne, 
both on his fraternal side and maternal side. Second, he is a child, so the Regency Council 
will rule in his place. So, us." 
"Nonsense! We will deal with the father! We will find a way!" said the bass. 
"We push," suggested the exalted, "my wife under him!" 
"Be still, Count Broinne. That is not what we are talking about." said the creaky "Gentlemen, 
we should discuss other matters, truly. I would like to point out that Emhyr var Emreis still 
prevails." 
"Of course", agreed the sneezer and trumpeted into his handkerchief. "He lives and reigns. He 
is at his peak, both physically and mentally. The latter, especially, cannot be disputed, after 
he has gotten rid of both your highnesses - along with any troops that would have been 
faithful to you. How will you accomplish a revolution, my Lord Prince Ardal, if you have to 
spend each moment overseeing the Eastern Division of the army in battle? And Prince 
Joachim will probably have to be with his troops in the Verden Special Operational Group." 
"Spare me the tips, Stefan Skellen." said the creaky. "And pulling that face only makes you 
look similar to your magician Vilgefortz in your imagination. And you should know, Owl, 
that if Emhyr really does get suspicious, it will be because of you - you and Vilgefortz. Admit 
it, you tried to catch the Cintran and buy Emhyr's favor with her? Now that the girl is dead, 
you no longer have anything to offer, right? Emhyr would quarter you, truly. You will not 
raise your hand against us, neither you nor the magician with whom you have allied 
yourself!" 
"No one of us will raise our hands, Joachim," put in the bass. "We need to look the truth in 
the face. We are in no better position than Skellen. The circumstances have brought us 
together. We are all in the same boat now." 
"But the Owl was the one who put us in this boat!" shouted the creaky "Why do we have to 
act secretly now? Emhyr knows everything! Vattier de Rideaux's agents search the whole 
empire for the Owl. And he has gotten rid of us, truly, sent us to war!" 
"Exactly", the syllable stretcher, "And you should take advantage of that. I can assure you 
gentlemen, everyone is fed up with the war currently underway. The army, the common 
people, and especially the merchants and entrepreneurs. The mere fact that the war is over 
will cause joy throughout the entire empire, regardless of how the war ends. Gentlemen, 
military leaders influence the course of the war, so, if I may say so, the end is always within 
reach. What is easier than to taking credit as heroes for ending an armed conflict in victory? 
And in case of defeat, as men who, sent by providence, negotiated an end to the bloodshed?" 

"True," said the creaking after a while. "By the Great Sun, that is true. You're right, Mr. 
Leuvaarden." 
"Emhyr," said the bass, "wrapped the rope around his neck when he sent us to the front." 
"Emhyr," said the exalted, "is still alive, my lord Prince. He is alive and doing well. We do 
not want to split the skin of the bear." 
"No," said the bass. "Not before we kill the bear." 
 
*** 
 
The silence lasted a long time. 
"So an assassination attempt. Death." 
"Death." 
"Death!" 
"Death. It is the only solution. Emhyr has followers as long as he lives. When Emhyr dies, 
everyone will support us. The aristocracy will side with us, because we are part of the 
aristocracy, and the power of the aristocracy lies in solidarity. A significant part of the army 
will be on our side, especially the officer corps, who still remember Emhyr's purges after the 
defeat of Sodden. The people will be on our side ..." 
"Because the people are ignorant, stupid, and easy to manipulate," Skellen finished the 
sentence, after he had himself a sneeze. "You need only 'Hurrah!' and make a speech from 
the senate steps promising to open the prisons and cut the taxes." 
"You are absolutely right, Owl," said the syllable stretcher. "Now I know why you shout so 
loudly for democracy." 
"I warn you," creaked the man they called Joachim, "that everything will not go as smoothly 
as it sounds, gentlemen. Our whole plan is based on the death of Emhyr. But we must not 
close our eyes to the fact that Emhyr has many followers, he has the units in the main army, 
and he has a fanatical guard. It will not be easy to pass through the Imperial Guard and strike 
at the Emperor, because, have no illusions, they will fight to the death." 
"And here," declared Stefan Skellen, "Vilgefortz offers us his help. We will not have to 
besiege the palace, and we will not have to fight through the Imperial Guard. The thing can 
be done by a single assassin with magical protection. As in Dreiberg, just before the mages 
coup on Thanedd." 
"King of Radovid of Redania." 
"Yes." 
"Vilgefortz has as an assassin?" 
"Yes. To prove our trust, gentlemen, I will tell you who it is. The sorceress Yennefer, who 
we've imprisoned." 
"Imprisoned? I've heard that Yennefer worked with Vilgefortz willingly." 
"She is his prisoner. Bewitched and hypnotized, programmed like a golem, she will execute 
the assassination. Then she will commit suicide." 
"Some magical witch doesn't quite suit me," said the one who extended the syllables, 
extending them even more out of sheer disgust. "A hero would be better, a blazing champion 
of an idea, an avenger ..." 
"An avenger" interrupted Skellen. "Fits like a glove, Mr. Leuvaarden. Yennefer will avenge 
the suffering that was inflicted by the tyrant. Emhyr has persecuted and driven to death her 
girl, an innocent child. This cruel tyrant, this pervert, has persecuted and murdered children 
instead of taking care of empire. Therefore, he will be overtaken by the avenging hand ..." 
"I", announced Ardal aep Dahy's bass voice, "I like it very well." 
"Me too," agreed to Joachim De Wette. 

"Wonderful!" shouted the eccentric Count Broinne. "For the rape of foreign women, the 
avenging hand will overtake the tyrant and pervert. Wonderful!" 
"One more thing," said Leuvaarden, stretching his syllables. "To guarantee your trust, Lord 
Skellen, I'll ask you to please betray to us the whereabouts of Mr. Vilgefortz." 
"Gentlemen, I ... I cannot ..." 
"That is why it would be a guarantee. A pledge of the sincerity and devotion to the cause." 
"You need not fear betrayal, Stefan," added aep Dahy. "None here will betray you. This is a 
paradox. In other circumstances, someone among us might even try to buy his life by 
betraying the rest. But all of us know only too well that they would buy nothing with the 
betrayal. Emhyr var Emreis does not forgive. He cannot. Instead of a heart he has a lump of 
ice. And therefore, all will be killed." 
Stefan Skellen no longer hesitated. "Okay," he said. "As a pledge of sincerity. Vilgefortz is 
hidden at the ..." 
 
*** 
 
The witcher sat at the opening of the tube and clenched his fists until they hurt. He strained 
his hearing. And his memory. 
 
*** 
 
The witcher's doubts concerning Fringilla's amulet were unjustified and vanished in a 
moment. When he returned the great cavern and approached the stone bridge over the abyss, 
the medallion began to jerk on his neck and struggle, not like a sparrow, but more like a large 
and powerful bird. Let's say, a crow. 
Geralt froze. He calmed the amulet. He did not make the slightest movement, so that no 
rustle, not even a breath, could deceive his hearing. He waited. He knew that on the other side 
of the abyss, beyond the bridge, there was something, something that was lurking in the dark. 
He did not rule out that it could also be concealed behind his back, and that the bridge might 
be a trap. He was not going to walk into this trap. He waited. And not in vain. 
"Hail, Witcher," he heard. "We are waiting for you here." 
The voice that came out of the darkness sounded strange and alien. But Geralt had heard 
voices like it more than once, he knew them. Thus spoke beings that were not used to 
communicating with the aid of articulate speech. Although they were able to use the 
apparatus of the lungs, diaphragm, trachea, and throat, these creatures could not use 
completely the articulation apparatus, even though their lips, palate, and tongues were built 
very similar to humans. Such beings accentuated their spoken words not only strangely and 
proudly, but also with sounds that are uncomfortable to the human ear - hard and ugly 
barking or soft and slimy hissing. 
"We are waiting for you here," repeated the voice. "We knew that you would come if we fed 
you with rumors. That you would come crawl under the earth, to search, to hunt, to track, to 
kill. But you will not leave here. You will never again see the sun that is so dear to you." 
"Show yourself." 
In the darkness beyond the bridge, something moved. The darkness seemed to aggregate in 
one place and took on an almost human form. The creature seemed to never remain in the 
same position or at the same location for a moment; it changed it by using faster, more 
nervous, blurred motion. The witcher had seen such creatures before. 
"A Korr," he stated calmly. "I should have expected to see the likes of you here. It's a miracle 
that I didn't find you earlier." 

"Take a look at you." The unnatural voice of the creature sounded mocking. "In the dark, and 
still you recognized me. And do you recognize that? And that? And that?" 
From the darkness emerged three more creatures, silently as ghosts. One, who had been 
hiding behind the Korr's back, also had the general shape and appearance of a humanoid, but 
it was more stocky, hunched, and ape-like. Geralt knew it was a Killmouli. 
The other two monsters were hiding, as he had correctly guessed, behind the bridge, ready to 
cut off his retreat if he had stepped onto the bridge. The first, on the left, resembled a giant 
spider, it stood in place while flexing its many legs. It was a Molding. The last creature 
reminded him of a candelabra, it liked something that had jumped straight out of the broken 
slate wall. Geralt could not say what it was. No such monster was recorded in the witcher 
books. 
"I want no quarrel with you", he said, and putting a little hope in the fact that the creatures 
had begun with conversation, rather than just going for his jugular in the dark. "I want no 
quarrel with you. But if it comes to that, I will defend myself." 
"We have taken that into account," the Korr said, hissing. "That is why we are four. That is 
why we have lured you here. You poison our lives, fucking witchers. The most beautiful 
holes in this part of the world, wonderful places to hibernate. We've spent the winter here 
almost since the beginning of time. And now you show up here to prey on us, you wretch. In 
order track us, hunt us, and kill us for money. But no more. Not from you." 
"Listen, Korr ..." 
"Politely," snarled the creature. "I do not tolerate insolence." 
"So how am I to address you ...?" 
"Mr. Schweitzer." 
"Well, Mr. Schweitzer," continued Geralt, seemingly obedient, "here is the thing. I have, I 
will not hide it, come here as a witcher with a witcher's job. I propose to let that subject rest. 
However, something happened in this cave, something that has changed the situation 
diametrically. I've learned something unusually important for me. Something that can change 
my whole life." 
"And what will follow from this?" 
"I need" - Geralt was a model of composure and patience - "to immediately get to the surface 
and to immediately set off for a long journey, without the slightest delay. A journey from 
which there might be no return. I do not think I will ever ... return to this area ..." 
"Trying to buy you your life, witcher?" hissed Mr. Schweitzer. "No use. You ask in vain. 
We've got you in a bind and will not let you out. We will kill you and think not only of 
ourselves, but also of our other comrades. We will kill you, if I may say so, for both our and 
their freedom." 
"I'll not only never come back to this area", Geralt continued patiently, "but will give up all 
my work as a witcher. I will never kill any of you ..." 
"You're lying! You lie in fear!" 
"But," - Geralt could not be interrupted this time - "I must, as I said, get outside, immediately. 
So you have two choices. The first: You believe in my sincerity, and I get out of here. The 
second: I leave behind your corpses." 
"The third," growled the Korr, "your corpse is left behind." 
The witcher removed his sword from the scabbard on his back with a hiss. 
"It will not be the only one," he said, unmoved. "Certainly not the only one, Mr. Schweitzer." 
The Korr was silent for a while. The Killmouli, who still stood behind his back, rocked back 
and forth and growled a little. The Molding bent and stretched its legs. The Candelabra had 
changed shape. Now it looked like a crooked little tree with two large, phosphorescent eyes. 
"Give us," finally said the Korr, "proof of your sincerity and your good will." 
"How?" 

"Your sword. You claim that you will cease to be a witcher. A sword makes a witcher. Throw 
it into the abyss. Or break it. Then we let you out." 
Geralt stood there motionless for a moment, only the water dripping from the ceiling and 
walls broke the silence. Then he slowly placed the sword vertically and deeply into a crevice. 
And broke the blade with a powerful kick of his boot. The sword burst with a sighing sound 
that echoed in the depths. 
The water dripped from the walls, ran them down like tears. 
"I cannot believe it," the Korr said slowly. "I cannot believe that someone could be so 
stupid." 
They all rushed at him, instantly, without a cry or a command. Mr. Schweitzer was the first to 
over the bridge - with stretched claws and bared fangs, which even a wolf would not have 
been ashamed of. 
Geralt approached it, whereupon he turned and struck it in the hip, the lower cheek, and its 
neck, renting its throat. The next moment he was on the bridge and slashed off one of the 
Killmouli's wrists with a blow. He doubled over and threw himself on the ground, just in 
time, because the Candelabra flew over him, grazing his jacket with its paws. The Molding 
jumped in front of witcher, thin legs whirling like a windmill. A swipe from one of its paws 
hit him on the side of the head; Geralt danced, made a feint, and hit with a sweeping blow. 
However, the Molding jumped again, but missed him. It landed on the railing and he pushed 
it, along with a hail of stones, into the abyss. Until then it had not made the slightest sound, 
but now that it fell into the abyss, it howled. It was a long time before the howling ceased. 
They attacked from two sides - the Candelabra on one, and the blood soaked Killmouli on the 
other, which had managed to stand up in spite of its injuries. The witcher jumped on the small 
stone railing, shaking the whole bridge. He balanced out and was now located beyond the 
reach of the Candelabra's clawed paws, and behind the Killmouli. The Killmouli had no 
neck, so Geralt gave him a blow to the temple. But the monster's head was like iron, so he 
had to strike a second time to finish it. It took him a split second too long. 
He received a blow to the head, pain flared in his skull and into his eyes. He spun around, 
covered himself with a large display of defense, and felt his blood gushing beneath his hair, 
trying to understand what had happened. After he avoided - miraculously - the second blow 
of the claws, he understood. The Candelabra had changed shape - it now attacked with almost 
impossibly long legs. 
That brought a disadvantage. Namely, imbalance and a shifted center of gravity. The witcher 
ducked under its feet and shortened the distance. The Candelabra saw what was going on, 
threw itself back like a cat, and stretched up on its hind paws, which were also reinforced 
with claws. Geralt jumped over it, cutting it mid-jump. He felt his blade cut through the body. 
He ducked, spun around, struck again, and sank to one knee. The creature screamed violently 
and quickly lowered its head, full of teeth, to the height of the witcher's chest. Its large eyes 
glowed in the dark. Geralt pushed it back with a sharp blow of his sword pommel, and made 
a strike at close range that separated half of its skull. Even without that half, this strange 
creature not recorded in the witcher books snapped at him with its teeth for another dozen 
seconds. 
 Then it died with a horrible, almost human sigh. 
The Korr lay in a pool of blood and twitched convulsively. 
The witcher stopped in front of him. "I cannot believe," he said, "that someone could be so 
stupid to fall for such a simple illusion as the broken sword." 
He wasn't sure whether the Korr was conscious enough to understand him. But basically, he 
didn't care. 
"I warned you," he said as he wiped the blood trickling down his cheek. "I warned you that I 
needed get out of here." 

Mr. Schweitzer began to tremble violently. He gasped, whistled, and creaked. Then he was 
quiet and did not move again. 
Water dripped from the ceiling and walls. 
 
*** 
 
"Are you satisfied now Regis?" 
"Now, yes." 
"Well, then." The witcher stood up. "Go on and pack your things. But be quick." 
"It will not take me long. Omnia mea mecum porto." 
"What?" 
"I do not have much luggage." 
"All the better. Meet me in front of the city in half an hour." 
"I'll be there." 
 
*** 
 
He had underestimated her. She had caught him. He only had himself to blame. Instead of 
hurrying, he should have ridden Roach out of the back of the palace, from the larger stables 
that were used by knights-errant, servants, and the staff, where his company had their horses. 
He had rushed and by habit had used the Princess' stable. And he should have guessed that 
she would be waiting in the royal stables. 
She paced from wall to wall, churning up the straw. She wore a short lynx fur, a white satin 
blouse, a black skirt, and high riding boots. The horses snorted, they could feel the anger 
radiating from her. 
"Oh, please," she said, grabbing the riding whip in his hand. "You are leaving! Without 
saying goodbye. Because a letter on a table is certainly not a goodbye. Not after what's united 
us. I can just imagine how your behavior is explained and justified by unusually weighty 
arguments." 
"It will be explained and justified. Sorry, Fringilla." 
"Sorry, Fringilla" she repeated, twisting her mouth furiously. "How scarce, how cautious, 
nearly laconic - what sense of style. I bet the letter you left for me is edited just as elegantly. 
Without undue waste in terms of ink." 
"I must go," he squeezed out. "You can imagine why. And for whom. Please forgive me. I 
was planning to sneak away in secret, quietly, because ... I do not want you trying to ride with 
us." 
"There you worried needlessly," she said emphatically as she bent the whip into a loop. "I 
would not ride with you, even if you begged me from your knees. Oh no, witcher. Ride alone, 
die alone, freeze to death in the passes alone. I have no obligation to Ciri. And to you? Do 
you know how many people beg for this, what you have? What you now shove aside, throw 
away with contempt?" 
"I'll never forget you." 
"Oh," she hissed. "You have no idea how much I desire to make sure of that. If not with 
magic, then with this whip!" 
"You wouldn't." 
"You're right, I wouldn't. I couldn't. I'm behaving like an abandoned and spurned lover. 
Classic. I'll accept it with my head held high. With pride and dignity. I'll bite back my tears. 
Then I'll cry into my pillow. And then I let myself be with another!" 

Towards the end she almost shouted. 

He said nothing. She was also silent. 
"Geralt," she finally said in a very different voice. "Stay with me." 
"I think I love you," she said when she saw that he hesitated before answering. "Stay with 
me. I beg you. I've never asked that of someone and do not think I'll ever do it again. I beg 
you." 
"Fringilla" he replied after a while. "You're a woman that a man could only dream of. It is my 
fault, entirely my fault, that I am not a dreamer by nature." 
"You," she said, biting her lip, "are like a fish hook, which, once stuck, can only be uprooted 
together with blood and flesh. Well, I myself am guilty, I knew what I was doing when I 
began this dangerous game. Luckily I also know how to deal with the consequences. In this 
regard, I have more than other women." 
He said nothing. 
"Besides," she added, "a broken heart, while it hurts much more than a broken arm, also heals 
much, much faster." 
Again he said nothing. 
Fringilla looked at the bruise on his cheek. "What about my amulet? Does it work well?" 
"It is simply fabulous. Thank you." 
She nodded. 
"Where do you ride?" She asked in a completely different voice, in a very different tone. 
"What did you learn? You know where Vilgefortz is hiding, don't you?" 
"Yes. Please do not ask me to tell you. I will not." 
"I'll have that information. One way or the other." 
"Really?" 
"I have a message", she stated, "that is very valuable. And for you, simply priceless. I will 
sell it to you in exchange for ..." 
"For a clear conscience," he finished the sentence for her. He looked into her eyes. "For the 
trust that I have given you. A moment ago you spoke of loving me. And now we begin to talk 
of exchanges?" 
She was silent for a long time. Then they fought fiercely for the whip they both were holding. 
"Yennefer." she said quickly, "The one whose name you've mentioned a few times to me at 
night, in moments of ecstasy, has not ever betrayed you or Ciri. She was not an accomplice to 
Vilgefortz. She fearlessly undertook an unprecedented risk to save Cirilla. She suffered a 
defeat and fell into Vilgefortz's hands. She was surely forced by torture to perform the 
magical detection that took place last year. Whether she still lives is not known. That's all I 
know. I swear it." 
"Thank you, Fringilla." 
"Go." 
"I trust you," he said without leaving. "And I will never forget what happened between us. I 
trust you, Fringilla. I will not stay with you, but I think I loved you too ... in my way. I ask 
that you keep secret what you are about to hear. Vilgefortz's hiding place is ..." 
"Wait," she interrupted. "Tell me later, after you say goodbye to me. A proper goodbye. Not 
with a note, not with stammering apologies. Say goodbye to me, as I want." 
She took off her lynx fur and laid it on a pile of straw. With a violent movement she tore 
open her blouse, she wore nothing underneath. She plopped down on the fur, taking Geralt 
with her. Geralt grabbed her neck, pulled up her skirt, and suddenly realized that there was no 
time to take off his gloves. Fortunately, Fringilla was not wearing any gloves. Or underwear. 
He was even more fortunate that she was not wearing spurs, for immediately afterwards the 
heels of her riding boots were literally everywhere – there was no telling what might have 
happened if she had been wearing spurs. 
When she cried, he kissed her. Stifling her cry. 

The horses, sensing both of their raging passions, neighed, stomped, and pushed against the 
walls, swirling the dust and hay. 
 
*** 
 
"Castle Rhys-Rhun, in Nazair, on the shores of Lake Muredach" Fringilla Vigo concluded 
triumphantly. "That is Vilgefortz's hideout. I got it out of the witcher before he rode away. 
We have enough time to pre-empt him. He cannot possibly be there before April." 
The nine women gathered in the great pillared hall of Castle Montecalvo nodded, looking at 
Fringilla with appreciative eyes. 
"Rhys-Rhun" repeated Philippa Eilhart while she bared her teeth in a predatory smile and 
played with the sardonyx cameo pinned to her dress. "Rhys-Rhun in Nazair. See you soon, 
Mr. Vilgefortz ... See you soon!" 
"If the witcher gets there," hissed Keira Metz, "he will find debris that won't even smell burnt 
anymore." 
"And neither will the dead bodies." Sabrina Glevissig smiled charmingly. 
"Bravo, Miss Vigo" Sile de Tancarville gave her a nod - a gesture that Fringilla would never 
have expected of the famous magician. "Perfect Work." 
Fringilla bowed her head. 
"Bravo," repeated Sile. "About three months Toussaint ... But it was well worth it." 
Fringilla Vigo let her eyes wander around the sorceresses sitting at the table. Around Sile, 
Philippa, and Sabrina Glevissig. Around Keira Metz, Margarita Laux-Antille, and Triss 
Merigold. Around Francesca Findabair and Ida Emean, whose intensely painted elven eyes 
expressed nothing. Around Assire var Anahid, whose eyes were restlessness and full of 
anxiety. 
"That it was," she admitted. 
Perfectly sincere. 
 
*** 
 
The dark blue sky was gradually turning black. A strong, icy wind blew through the 
vineyards. Geralt buttoned up his wolf's fur clothing and wrapped a wool scarf wound around 
his neck. He felt very well. The lovemaking had, as usual, brought him up to peak physical, 
mental, and spiritual condition, wiping out all traces of doubt, making his mind clear and 
lively. He only regretted only that he would not experience this wonderful panacea again for 
a long time. 
The voice of Reynart de Bois-Fresnes tore him from his thoughts. 
"Bad weather is coming," the knight-errant said as he stared into the east, from whence the 
wind blew. "Hurry. If this wind brings snow, if it manages to catch you on the passes, then 
you are sitting in a trap. The only thing you can do then is pray to the gods - both those that 
you worship and those you've only heard of - for the snow to thaw." 
"We understand." 
"The Sansretour will lead you the first few days, keep to the river. You will ride past a 
trapper trading post and come to a point where a tributary flows into the Sansretour from the 
right. Do not forget, from the right. Its course will show you the way to Malheur Pass. If, 
with the help of the gods, you manage to conquer the Malheur, do not rejoice too much, you 
still have the Sansmerci and Mortblanc passes in front of you. You have to overcome both, 
then you can descend into the Sudoth Valley. Sudoth has a warm micro-climate, almost like 
Toussaint. But the soil is so poor, no wine will grow there ..." 
He broke off embarrassed, as he noticed the disapproving glances. 

"Okay," he croaked. "To the point. The town of Caravista is located at the end of the Sudoth. 
My cousin lives there, Guy de Bois-Fresnes. Visit him and refer to me. If it turns out that he 
has died, or is an imbecile, then remember that the next step of your journey is towards the 
plains of Mag Deira and the valley of the Sylte River. From there, Geralt, follow the map you 
had the cartographers in town draw you. While we are discussing cartography - I do not quite 
understand why you asked him about the castles..." 
"Forget it, Reynart. Nothing like happened. You heard nothing and saw nothing. Even if they 
tighten you up on the rack. Do you understand?" 
"I understand." 
"A horseman," warned Cahir, subduing his erupting stallion. "A rider approaches from the 
palace, at a gallop." 
"If there is only one" Angoul'me said with a big smile, stroking the axe hanging from her 
saddle, "it will hardly be a problem." 
The rider on the galloping horse turned out to be Dandelion. And, wonder of wonders, the 
horse turned out to be Pegasus, the poet's gelding, who was not used to the sharp galloping 
and did not appear to enjoy it. 
"Well," the troubadour said, so out of breathe that it looked like he had carried the gelding 
instead of the other way around. "Well, I did it. I was afraid I wouldn't be able to catch you." 
"Don't tell me you're coming along with us now." 
"No, Geralt" - Dandelion bowed his head - "I'm not coming along. I'm staying here in 
Toussaint, with Weasel. That is, with Anarietta. But I had to say goodbye to you. Wish you 
luck on your way." 
"Thank the princess for everything. And find a justification for us leaving so suddenly, and 
without saying goodbye. Explain it somehow." 
"You took a chivalrous vow, and now you must fulfill it. Everyone in Toussaint, including 
Little Weasel, will understand that. But here ... take this. This will be my contribution." 
"Dandelion" - Geralt took a bag from the poet - "we do not suffer lack of money. It isn't 
necessary ..." 
"This will be my contribution," repeated the troubadour. "Cash never hurts. Plus, it's not mine 
- I took these ducats from Little Weasel's privy purse. Why are you looking at me like that? 
Women don't need money. And why should they? They don't drink, don't roll dice - women 
are condemned, they do it to themselves. So, it's all good! Now ride off, before I start to cry. 
And when it's over, you have to stop by Toussaint, come back to tell me everything. And I 
will paint Ciri. Do you promise, Geralt?" 
"I promise." 
"Well, it's all good." 
"Wait." Geralt turned his horse, rode close to the poet, and removed a secret letter from his 
jacket. "See that this letter comes to the right place ..." 
"Fringilla Vigo?" 
"No. Dijkstra." 
"Why, Geralt? And how am I supposed to do that?" 
"Find a way. I know you can do it. And now, take care. Give me a hug, old fool." 
"Give me a hug, friend. I'll keep my eye out for you!" 
They watched him leave, riding at a trot towards Beauclair. 
The sky was dark. 
"Reynart." The witcher turned in the saddle. "Ride with us." 
"No, Geralt," replied Reynart de Bois-Fresnes after a moment. "I am a knight-errant. But I am 
not crazy." 
 
*** 

 
In the great pillared hall of Castle Montecalvo they were in unusually high spirits. Here the 
usually dominant light of the candelabra had now been replaced by the milky light of a large, 
magical screen. The image on the screen wavered, flickered, and disappeared from time to 
time. All this increased the tension and excitement. And nervousness. 
"Ha," said Philippa Eilhart with a predatory smile. "What a shame that I cannot be there. A 
little action would do me good. And a little adrenaline." 
Sile de Tancarville gave her a disapproving look, but said nothing. Francesca Findabair and 
Ida Emean stabilized the image with spells and enlarged it so that it occupied the entire 
screen. They could clearly see black peaks against the backdrop of deep blue sky, filled with 
stars, which also reflected on the surface of a lake situated by a dark and edgy profile of a 
castle. 
"I am still not sure," Sile said, "whether it was proper to transfer the management of this task 
force to young Sabrina and Metz. Keira had her ribs broken on Thanedd, she will probably 
want to take revenge. And Sabrina... well, she likes the action and adrenaline a bit too much. 
Isn't that so, Philippa?" 
"We talked about this already", snapped Philippa, her voice was as sour as a plum. "We've 
laid down the rules. No one is killed if it can be avoided. Sabrina and Keira's group will enter 
Rhys-Rhun on tiptoe, quiet as a mouse, psst. They will take Vilgefortz alive, without a 
scratch, without a bruise. Those are the rules we set. Although I am still of the opinion that 
we should have made an example. So that the few in the castle who would have survived the 
night would have woken up crying, and would have dreamed of this night for the rest of their 
lives." 
"Revenge," the sorceress from Kovir said dryly, "is the joy of mediocre, weak, and petty 
minds." 
"Maybe," agreed Philippa with a seemingly indifferent smile. "But it is still a joy." 
"Enough of that," Margarita Laux-Antille lifted a glass of sparkling wine in the air. "I suggest 
we drink to the health of Miss Fringilla Vigo, through whose efforts Vilgefortz's hideout was 
discovered. Really, Miss Fringilla, good work, very good work." 
Fringilla bowed and raised her glass in reply. She noticed a hint of mockery in Philippa's 
black eyes. There was indignation in Triss Merigold's blue-eyed gaze. She could not decipher 
the smiles of Francesca or Sile. 
"It begins," said Assire var Anahid, pointing to the magical image. 
They sat down comfortably. In order to see better, Philippa dampened the candlelight with a 
spell. 
They watched as black figures flew by the mountains, as silent and agile as bats. As they 
broke formation and descended to the battlements and ramparts of Castle Rhys-Rhun. 
"It must be a hundred years ago," murmured Philippa, "since I've had a broom between my 
legs. Soon I will forget how to fly." 
Sile, eyes fixed on the screen, silenced her with an impatient hiss. 
The windows of the black castle flashed briefly with fire. Once, twice, three times. They 
knew what it was. Locked doors and locking chains being shattered under the blows of ball 
lightning. 
"They're inside," Assire var Anahid said quietly, the only one not looking at the screen, but 
instead into a crystal ball lying on the table. "The task force is inside. But something is 
wrong. Something is not as it should be." 
Fringilla's heart was pounding and her stomach felt queasy. She knew that everything was 
not the way it should be. 
"Miss Glevissig" reported Assire again, "will open a direct communicator." 

The space between the pillars of the hall suddenly flared up and an oval materialized into 
Sabrina Glevissig - dressed in men's clothes, her hair held back by a chiffon scarf around her 
forehead, her face blackened with strips of camouflage. Behind the sorceress' back, they 
could see dirty stone walls and shredded rags that had once been tapestries. 
Sabrina's hand stretched out towards them, her glove displaying the hanging remains of long 
strips of cobwebs. 
"Just these," she said, gesturing violently, "there are plenty these here! Just these! Hell, what 
a stupid ... What a disgrace ..." 
"Coherent, Sabrina!" 
"What, coherent?" Shouted the magician from Kaedwen. "How should I make it more 
coherent? Can you not see? This is the castle of Rhys-Rhun! It is empty! Dilapidated and 
empty! It is a damned empty ruin! There's nothing here! Nothing!" 
Keira Metz appeared standing behind Sabrina's back, looking like the purest hell with 
camouflage painted on her face. 
"No one," she confirmed quietly, "has been in this castle. For about fifty years. For fifty 
years, there has not been a living soul, except for spiders, rats, and bats. We have raided the 
entirely wrong place." 
'Have you verified that this is not an illusion?" 
"Do you think we are children, Philippa?" 
"Be careful, both of you." Philippa Eilhart nervously ran her fingers through her hair. "Tell 
the mercenaries and novices that this was an exercise. They should return to be paid. Return 
immediately. And it put on a good face, you hear? A very good face!" 

The communication oval went out. Only one image remained on the screen. The castle of 
Rhys-Rhun against the black, glittering stars of the heavens. And the lake where the stars 
were reflected. 
Fringilla Vigo looked at the table. She felt as though the pulsating blood in her cheeks would 
come bursting out at any moment. 
"I really...," she said, as she could no longer endure the silence that prevailed in the great 
pillared hall of Castle Montecalvo. "I really ... do not..." 
"I do," said Triss Merigold. 
"This castle ..." Philippa said thoughtfully, ignoring the others. "This castle ... Rhys-Rhun ... 
We will have to destroy it. Completely lay it to ruins. And any records of this whole affair – 
legends or traditions, will be required to submit to a careful censorship. Do you ladies know 
what I mean?" 
"Very well." Findabair Francesca, who had been silent until then, nodded. Ida Emean, who 
had also been silent, allowed a very eloquent snort. 
"I ..." Fringilla Vigo was still stunned. "I really do not understand how ... how this could 
happen..." 
"Ah," Sile de Tancarville said after a very long silence. "There is nothing further to say, Miss 
Vigo. No one is perfect." 
Philippa snorted softly. Assire var Anahid sighed and looked up at the ceiling. 
"Ultimately," Sile added with pursed lips, "it is something that each of us has already 
experienced at some point. Each of us, as we sit here, has at some time been betrayed, 
exploited, or made a mockery of by a man." 
 
*** 
 
 
 

 
'I love thee, thy beauty I covet and choose; 
Be willing, my darling, or force I shall use' 
'Dear father, oh father, he seizes my arm! 
The Alder King, father, has done me harm!' 
 
Johann Wolfgang von Goethe 
 
Everything has already been done once, everything will eventually happen again. And 
everything has already been described before. 
 
Vysogota of Corvo 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
