Chapter Six 

 

 

They left the road that led along the Newi Valley, taking a shortcut through the 
mountains. They rode as fast as the path allowed. It was narrow, sinuous, and densely 
surrounded by fantastically shaped rocks, which were covered with different coloured mosses 
and lichens. They rode between vertical rock walls from which striped ribbons of cascades 
and waterfalls hung. They rode through canyons and ravines, and over varying small bridges 
spanning chasms, where white foam whirled on the ground far below. 

The angular blade of Mount Gorgon seemed to tower directly above their heads, though 
they could not see the summit of the Devil's Mountain – it sank into the clouds and fog that 
covered the sky. The weather – as it does in the mountains – changed for the worse in only a 
few short hours. It started to drizzle, annoyingly and obnoxiously. 

When evening came, all three began to keep an impatient and nervous lookout for a 
shepherd's hut, a ruined sheepfold, or at least a cave. For anything that would protect them 
against the night sky and dripping water. 

'It seems to have stopped raining,' said Angouleme with hope in her voice. 'It's only 
dripping through the holes in the roof of the hut now. Tomorrow, if we are lucky, we will 
reach Belhaven, where we can stay in a nearby shed or barn.' 

'We aren't riding into town?' 

'Absolutely not. Strangers on horses catch the eye, and Nightingale has a lot of informers 
in the city.' 

'Considering that the plan is to consciously offer ourselves up as bait...' 

'No,' she interrupted him. 'It's a wretched plan. Together, we will arouse suspicion. 
Nightingale is a cunning dog, and the news that I was captured has certainly reached him by 
now. And if Nightingale suspects something, then the half-elf will learn of it.' 

'What do you suggest?' 

'We go around the city to the east, near the mouth of the Sansretour Valley, where there 
are iron mines. I have a friend in one of the mines. We will pay him a visit. Who knows, if 
we're lucky, perhaps this visit will be worth it?' 

'Can you speak more clearly?' 

'I will tomorrow. In the mine. I don't want to jinx it.' 

Cahir threw birch twigs into the fire. It had rained all day and any other timber would not 
have been able to burn. But the birch wood, although it was wet, only crackled a little before 


immediately starting to burn with high blue flame. 

'Where are you from, Angouleme?' 

'From Cintra, witcher. It's a country by the sea, at the mouth of the Yaruga.' 

'I know where Cintra is.' 

'Why are you asking if you know so much? Am I so interesting to you?' 

'Let's say a little bit.' 

They were silent. The fire crackled. 

'My mother,' Angouleme finally said, her gaze directed at the flames, 'was a Cintrierin 
noble, by the right of high birth. Her House's coat-of-arms was a Meerkat. I would show it to 
you – because my mother gave me a locket with this stupid cat – but I lost it playing dice... 
But this shitty House shunned me, because my mother supposedly had relations with 
someone from the general populace, probably a stable-boy, and I supposedly am a bastard, a 
shame, a disgrace, and a stain on the House's honour. So they gave me to some distantly 
related in-laws, who certainly had neither a cat nor a dog nor any beast on their coat-of-arms, 
but they were not bad to me. Sent me to school, all in all hit me only a little... Although they 
reminded me quite often of who I was – a bastard, begotten in the bushes. My mother visited 
me maybe three or four times when I was little. Then she stopped. It turns out that she didn't 
give a shit about me – even though...' 

'How did you come to be among criminals?' 

'You sound like an investigating judge,' she hissed and screwed up her face ludicrously. 
'Among the criminals, pah! Strayed from the path of virtue, bah!' 

She muttered something to herself, looked in her jacket for something, and then pulled out 
something that was not exactly familiar to the witcher. 

'That One-Eyed Fulk,' she said vaguely, as she eagerly rubbed a bit into her gums and 
inhaled some through her nose, 'is a decent fellow after all. He took what he took, but he left 
me the dust. Will you take a pinch, witcher?' 

'No. I would prefer if you also would take none.' 

'Why?' 

'Because.' 

'Cahir?' 

'I do not use Fisstech.' 

'It seems I am among paragons of virtue.' She shook her head. 'Will you preach moral 
certainty and lecture me that I will go blind, deaf, and hairless from the dust? That I will have 


a mentally defective child?' 

'Leave off, Angouleme. And finish your story.' 

The girl sneezed violently. 'Well, as you will. Where was I... Aha. The war broke out, you 
know the one with Nilfgaard, and the relatives lost all their possessions and had to leave their 
home. They had three children of their own and I was too much to bear, so they gave me a 
new home. It was run by the priests of some temple. A fun place, as it turned out. A common 
whorehouse, a brothel, for people who liked to dine on succulent young fruits with white 
skins, you get it? Little girls. And little boys too. I was already too old when I went there, 
there were no lovers...' 

Quite unexpectedly, she blushed; it could even be seen in the firelight. 'Almost none' she 
forced out. 

'How old were you then?' 

'Fifteen. I got to know a girl and five boys, my age and slightly older. And we came to a 
unanimous agreement. We knew the legends and the stories. Of the madman De'I, of Black 
Bart, of the Cassini brothers... We wanted the freedom of the road, the merry life of bandits! 
Why, we said to ourselves, should we stay where we only get something to eat twice a day 
and had to sell our asses to repulsive creeps...' 

'Go easy on your choice of words, Angouleme. You know, too much cursing is 
unhealthy.' 

The girl squawked and spat into the fire. 'You really must be a paragon of virtue! Well, 
I'll come to the point, because I do not feel like talking. We found knives in the kitchen of the 
home – they were sufficient after we grinded them well on the whetstone and belt. We turned 
the legs of a chair into great clubs. We just needed horses and money, so we waited until two 
scoundrels came, regular customers, old as the hills, ha, at least forty. They came, sat down, 
drank a little wine, and waited until their priests, as usual, tied their selected young thing into 
a specially refined piece of furniture... But that day they did not get to fuck her!' 

'Angouleme.' 

'Okay, okay. In short: We botched things up with the two old scoundrels, three priests, 
and a stable boy – the only one who had fought for the horses instead of fleeing. The temple 
guard would not give us the gate key, so we burned the gatehouse until he came out, but we 
spared his life, because that was a better age – we were always benevolent and good. And we 
went on robber's road. That's how it went for us, sometimes good, sometimes bad, 
sometimes we dealt it, and sometimes we took it. Sometimes we were tired, sometimes 
hungry. Ha, hungry more often. I caught and ate more of what creeps and crawls than I ever 
had in my life. And of what flies – I once even ate a kid's kite, because it was stuck together 
with glue made from flour.' 

She paused and vigorously ran her hand through her straw-blond hair. 


'But what's in the past is in the past. As far as I can tell you: Of those who escaped from 
the home with me, no one lives. The last two, Owen and Abel, were done in a few days ago 
by the soldiers of Lord Fulk. Abel even dropped his sword like me, but they cut him down 
anyway.' 

'They spared me. But don't think it was out of loving kindness. They already had me 
stretched spread eagle on the ground when an officer came and forbade them the pleasure. 
Well, then you came and saved me from the gallows...' 

She paused for a moment. 

'Witcher?' 

'I'm listening.' 

'I know how I can prove my gratitude. If you just want to...' 

'What?' 

'I should go check on the horses,' Cahir said quickly, standing up and wrapping his coat 
around him. 'I'll see how their feet are doing...' 

The girl sneezed, sniffled, and cleared her throat. 

'Not a word of it, Angouleme,' he warned her, feeling really bad, really ashamed, and 
really confused. 'Not a word!' 

She cleared her throat again. 'You really don't desire me? Not a bit?' 

'Milva gave you a taste of the strap, you snot nosed brat. If you don't shut up 
immediately, you'll get a second helping from me.' 

'I'm not saying another word.' 

'Good girl.' 

 

*** 

 

The slope was covered with small, twisted pines that hung crookedly, gaping pits, and 
holes. There were also many boards secured with rubber stamps and connected by stairs, 
ladders and scaffolds. Walkways protruded from the holes, supported by crossed poles. On 
some walkways, people were busily moving carts and wheelbarrows. The contents of the 
carts and wheelbarrows – at first glance muddy soil, interspersed with rocks – were dumped 
from the walkways into a large square trough, which then flowed into a complex of 
increasingly smaller and separated troughs. Water flowed continuously and noisily through 
the wooden troughs, which were supported on low-post cross gutters of a wooded hill. They 


apparently derived somewhere down the slope. 

Angouleme dismounted and signalled for Geralt and Cahir to dismount as well. They tied 
the horses to a fence and walked towards a building, trudging through mud next to leaky 
gutters and pipes. 

'The iron ore is washed here,' said Angouleme while pointing. 'Over there it is brought 
out in the tunnels of the mine. They feed material there, pouring it into the troughs where it is 
washed with water from the stream. The ore is deposited in sieves, where it is separated out. 
There are many such mines and filtration camps around Belhaven. But the ore is then moved 
into the forested valleys, like the Mag Turga, because wood is needed for the furnaces and 
smelters...' 

'Thanks for the lecture,' Geralt interrupted her with sour expression. 'I've already seen 
several mines in my life and I know what it takes to smelt. When will you finally reveal to us 
our purpose for riding here?' 

'To chat with one of my acquaintances. He's a pit foreman here. Come with me. Ha, I see 
him already! There, in the carpentry building. Come on.' 

'That dwarf there?' 

'Yes. His name is Golan Drosdeck. He is, as I said, a...' 

'Pit foreman. You said. But you have not said why you want to chat with him.' 

'Take a look at your boots.' 

 Geralt and Cahir obediently looked at their shoes, which were covered in a strange, 
reddish coloured mud. 'The half-elf you seek,' Angouleme answered the question before they 
could ask it, 'was at the meeting with Nightingale with the very same reddish dirt on his 
shoes. Get it now?' 

'Now, yes. And the dwarf?' 

'You shouldn't respond all the time. For variety, you should try keeping quiet every once 
in a while – it makes for a grim countenance.' 

They had no trouble making their way through the mining camp. Some of the miners 
looked at them and then quickly looked away; others remained frozen with their mouths 
open. Anyone that was in their way quickly moved aside. Geralt could imagine why. His face 
still shone and Cahir's was still covered in stains, bruises, scratches and scrapes – the scenic 
remnants of the fight and the beating Milva had given them. So they looked like individuals 
who enjoyed cutting each other in the face, and who would also not take long to polish the 
face of a third person. 

The dwarf, Angouleme's friend, stood beside a carpentry building, painting an inscription 
on something like a blackboard, which was cobbled together from two planed boards. He 


noticed the three and put away his brush, set his paint bucket aside, and looked at them from 
under lowered brows. His physiognomy, ornamented by a speckled beard, was suddenly 
painted in utter amazement. 'Angouleme?' 

'Hello, Drosdeck.' 

'Is that you?' The dwarf opened his bearded mouth. 'Is that really you?' 

'No. It's not me. It's the newly resurrected prophet Marjoram. Don't ask silly questions, 
Golan. For a change, you could act a little wiser.' 

'Don't joke, Bright. I never expected to see you again. Mauleslin was here five days ago 
and he told me that they caught you and put you to the stake in Riedbrune. He swore it was 
the truth!' 

'Well, that's a good thing.' The girl shrugged her shoulders. 'Now, if Mauleslin ever 
wants to borrow money from you and swears that he will give it back, then you'll know what 
his oath is worth.' 

'I already knew that,' the dwarf replied, then blinked rapidly and twitched his nose just 
like a rabbit. 'I wouldn't lend him a penny if they were falling from the sky. But the fact that 
you're alive and safe makes me happy, ha, that makes me glad! Maybe you will even pay 
your debt to me?' 

'Perhaps. Who knows?' 

'And who do you have here with you, Bright?' 

'Good friends.' 

'Well you look good, but...where are the gods leading you?' 

'As usual, I'm going astray.' Ignoring the threatening eyes of the witcher, she drew a 
pinch of Fisstech, sniffed it through her nose, and rubbed the rest into her gums. 'You sniff, 
Golan?' 

'Well.' The dwarf held out his hand and pulled a pinch of the narcotic into his nose. 

'In truth,' the girl continued, 'I'll probably go into Belhaven. Do you know where 
Nightingale and the Hanse are?' 

Golan Drosdeck cocked his head. 'You, Bright, should stay out of Nightingale's way. 
They say he's as mad at you as a wolverine when woken in the winter.' 

'Whoa! Even after he heard that two horses pulled me onto a sharpened stake? Didn't he 
feel sorry? Hasn't he shed any tears?' 

'Absolutely not. He supposedly said: Now Angouleme got what we knew all along she 
must – a pole in the ass.' 


'Well, what a boor. A vulgar bastard. The governor Fulk would say 'dregs of society'. But 
I say, 'dregs of the cloaca'!' 

'Something you should rather say behind his back, Bright. And do not loiter in the area of 
Belhaven, make a detour around the city. And if you must to go into town, go in disguise...' 

'Don't teach a grandfather to cough, Golan.' 

'I wouldn't dare.' 

'Look, dwarf.' Angouleme braced her boot against one of the steps to carpentry. 'I'm 
going to ask you a question. Do not hurry to respond – think twice before you answer.' 

'Ask.' 

'Have you, by chance, recently come across a certain half-elf? A stranger, not from here?' 

Golan Drosdeck inhaled air, sneezed vigorously, and wiped his nose on his wrist. 'A half-
elf, you say? What a half-elf?' 

'Don't be stupid, Drosdeck. The one Nightingale hired for the special job. To get rid of 
someone. A certain witcher...' 

'A witcher?' Golan Drosdeck smiled and lifted his board up off the floor. 'Imagine that! 
Fact is, we are looking for a witcher – that's why we've been painting these signs and hanging 
them in the area. Look, here: Looking for Witcher, good pay, plus room and board, Inquire 
for details with the management of the mine 'LITTLE BABETTE'. How do you spell 
'Details'? With an 'ai' or 'ei'?' 

'Write: 'Particulars'. And why do you need a witcher in the mine?' 

'What a question. What else, if not for monsters?' 

'Like what?' 

'Knockers and Barbegazi. They are all over the place on the lower levels of the mine.' 

Angouleme threw a glance at Geralt, who confirmed with a nod that he knew what they 
were. Then he gave her a meaningful cough, letting her know that he wanted to get back to 
business. 

'So, back to business.' The girl had understood instantly. 'What do you know of that half-
elf?' 

'I do not know of any half-elf.' 

'I told you to think twice.' 

'I've done just that.' Golan Drosdeck gave her a sly look. 'And I think that it is not worth 
it for me to know something on this matter.' 


'What does...?' 

'It means that it is restless. The terrain is restless and the days are restless. Gangs, 
Nilfgaardians, the freedom fighters of the 'Free North Case'... and various foreign elements, 
half-elves. Each one is eager to cause trouble...' 

'What does...?' Angouleme wrinkled her nose. 

'It means that you owe me money, Bright. Instead of returning it, you want to add new 
debt. Significant debt – because what you ask can get a person a blow to the head, and not 
with bare fists, but with a pickaxe. What do I get? Does it pay for me to know something 
about this half-elf, eh? Do I get anything for it? It seems there are only risks and no reward...' 

Geralt had heard enough. The conversation bored him and neither the jargon nor manner 
appealed to him. With a swift movement he seized the dwarf's beard, pulled it towards him, 
and then shoved him back. Golan Drosdeck tripped over the bucket of paint and fell. The 
witcher leaped on him, put a knee to his chest, and shoved a knife in front of his sparkling 
eyes. 'Your reward,' he growled, 'will be that you'll get away from here with your life. Start 
talking.' 

Golan's eyes darted all around, from the caves to the walkways. 

'Talk,' repeated Geralt. 'Tell me what you know. Otherwise I'll cut your throat so that 
you'll drown before you bleed to death...' 

'RIALTO'...' groaned the dwarf. 'In the mine named 'RIALTO'...' 

 

*** 

 

Only minor details distinguished the mine 'RIALTO' from 'LITTLE BABETTE', as well as 
the other mines and surface-mines that Angouleme, Geralt, and Cahir passed by – 'THE 
SPRING MANIFESTO', 'ALTERZ', 'NEUERZ', 'APRIL FOOLS', 'DULCINELLA', 
'COMMON CAUSE' and 'HAPPY HOLE'. Work was in full swing in all of them – muddy 
earth was brought out of tunnels or shafts, poured into troughs, and washed in sieves. All of 
them had plenty of the characteristic red mud. 

'RIALTO' was a large ore mine near the summit of the hill. The summit was cut off and 
formed an open pit. The filtration camp was actually on a terrace cut into the mountainside. 
Next to the tunnel mouths, which gaped in the vertical mountainside, were troughs, sieves, 
gutters and other accessories of mining. It was a true settlement of wooden huts, bark-covered 
huts, shacks, and sheds. 

'I don't know anyone,' the girl said as she firmly tied her reins to a fence. 'But we will try 
to talk to the manager. Geralt, if you can help it, do not immediately grab him by the throat 


and threaten him with a knife. Let's talk first...' 

'Don't teach a grandfather to cough, Angouleme.' 

They did not talk. They did not even have to go to the building that they suspected was 
the manager's office. In a small square where ore was loaded on wagons, they met five riders. 

'Oh damn,' said Angouleme. 'Oh damn. Look, what the wind just blew in.' 

'What is it?' 

'Those are Nightingale's people. They've come to collect the protection money. They've 
already seen and recognized me... fucking shit! Now we're sitting in the soup...' 

'Can you deceive them?' murmured Cahir. 

'I don't think so.' 

'Because?' 

'I robbed Nightingale when I fled from the Hanse. They do not forgive... But I'll try. You 
stay silent. Keep your eyes open and be ready. For anything.' 

The mounted riders came closer. Two rode in the lead – a greying, long-haired man 
wearing a wolf fur and a young, lanky man with a beard, which he had apparently grown to 
conceal pimple scars. Geralt noticed the flash of concealed hatred in their eyes when they 
looked at Angouleme. 

'Bright.' 

'Novosad. Yirrel. Greetings. Beautiful day today. Just a pity that it's raining.' 

The Greyhair dismounted, or more precisely, jumped from the saddle, throwing his right 
leg over his horse's neck with a flourish. The others also dismounted. As he walked closer, 
the Greyhair handed his reins to Yirrel – the beanpole with the beard. 

'So,' he said. 'Our talkative goose. As it turns out, you're alive and healthy?' 

'And still kicking.' 

'Reckless brat! Rumour has it that you kicked, but while on the pole. Rumour has it that 
One-Eyed Fulk caught you. Rumour has it that you sang like a lark on the rack and betrayed 
us all when they asked!' 

'Rumour has it,' snapped Angouleme, 'that your mother, Novosad, demands that her 
customers pay her four pennies, but still no one will give her more than two.' 

The robber spat contemptuously at her feet. 

Again Angouleme snapped, just like a cat. 'Novosad,' she said boldly, putting her hands 
on her hips. 'I have business to discuss with Nightingale.' 


'Interesting. He has business to discuss with you as well.' 

'Shut up and listen for as long as I feel like talking. Two days ago, a mile away from 
Riedbrune, these two friends of mine and I made cold the witcher, the one Nightingale had 
the job for. Do you understand?' 

Novosad looked at his mates meaningfully, then straightened his gloves and looked at 
Geralt and Cahir appraisingly. 'Your new friends,' he repeated slowly. 'Ha, I can see by their 
visages that they are not priests. They killed the witcher, you say? How? With a stab in the 
back? Or while he was asleep?' 

'That's a minor detail.' Angouleme made a wry face like a monkey. 'An important detail, 
however, is that said witcher has bitten the dust. I don't want to mess with Nightingale, don't 
want to drive his parade. But business is business. The half-elf gave you an advance – which 
I don't care about – that's your money, for expenses and effort. But the second instalment, 
which the half-elf promised after work was done, is mine by rights.' 

'By rights?' 

'Yes!' Angouleme ignored his sarcastic tone. 'Because we have fulfilled the contract and 
killed the witcher, and we can prove it to the half-elf. I'll take what's mine and disappear into 
the blue and misty distance. With Nightingale, as I said, I do not want to compete. There is 
not enough room on the North Case for the two of us. Convey this to him, Novosad.' 

'Is that all?' he asked with venomous sarcasm. 

'And kisses,' growled Angouleme. 'You can kiss my ass in his place, by proxy.' 

'I think,' Novosad announced, as he glanced at his companions. 'That I should bring your 
ass to him in person, Angouleme. I, Angouleme, am going to bring you to him in chains, so 
he can talk to you and clarify everything. And settle. Everything. The question of who is 
entitled to the money from the contract with the half-elf Schirru. The payment for what you 
stole. And also, that there is not enough space on the Northern Case for the both of you. In 
this way, everything is settled. Every detail.' 

'There's one little problem.' Angouleme dropped her hands. 'How do you plan to take me 
to Nightingale, Novosad?' 

'Oops!' The bandit stretched out his hand. 'By the throat!' 

With a lightning-fast movement, Geralt moved his Sihil under Novosad's nose. 'I would 
not advise that,' he growled. 

Novosad jumped back and drew his sword. With a hiss, Yirrel tore a scimitar from the 
sheath on his back. The others followed their example. 

'I would not advise that,' repeated the witcher. 

Novosad cursed. He looked at his companions. He was weak in arithmetic, but he still 


came to the conclusion that five was much more than three. 'At them!' he screamed and 
threw himself at Geralt. 'Kill them!' 

The witcher dodged the blow with a half spin and hit him just below the temple. Even 
before Novosad fell, Angouleme made a throwing motion – a knife whizzed through the air 
and the attacking the Yirrel staggered, a bone handle jutting out from under his chin. The 
bandit dropped his sword and tore the knife out with both hands. Blood poured from his 
throat as Angouleme jumped up and kicked him in the chest, knocking him to the ground. 
Meanwhile, Geralt had cut down another bandit. Cahir gave one mighty blow with his 
Nilfgaardian sword and the head of a bandit fell, somewhat in the shape of a portion of 
melon. The last bandit retreated and jumped on his horse. Cahir heaved up his sword, grabbed 
it by the blade and threw it like a spear. It hit the robber right between the shoulder blades. 
The horse whinnied, tossed its head, and fell to its knees, then began to stomp and drag the 
corpse, whose hands were still clutching the bridle strap, through the red mud. 

Everything had happened in no more than five heartbeats. 

'Peeeople!' someone screamed between the buildings. 'Peeooplee! Heeelp! Murder, 
murder, they murdered them!' 

'Army! Get the military!' shouted another mountain man, while he drove back the 
children who had appeared – in accordance with the ancient custom of all children from the 
beginning of time – to gape and stand in people's way. 

'Someone should run, get the Military!' 

Angouleme picked up her knife, wiped it and put it in her boot. 'Leave off, please!' she 
shouted back while she looked around. 'Are you blind, you mountain miner, or what? That 
was self-defence! The crooks attacked us! Didn't you notice? Plus, didn't you notice they 
were evil? Haven't they extorted protection money from some of you?' 

She sneezed violently. She pulled the bag from the still-twitching Novosad's belt, and 
then bent over Yirrel. 

'Angouleme.' 

'What?' 

'Stop it' 

'Why? This is loot! Do you have too much money?' 

'Angouleme...' 

'Hey, you,' a sonorous voice suddenly said. 'Come here a moment.' 

There were three men in the open door of a building that served as a tool shed. Two were 
musclemen with low cut hair, low foreheads, and certainly lower intelligence. The third – the 
one that had called them – was an unusually tall, dark haired, handsome man 


'I couldn't help but hear the discussion that preceded the commotion,' the man said, 'I 
didn't believe that you had killed the witcher, I thought it was an empty boast. But I do not 
think that anymore. Come in here, into the building.' 

Angouleme gave an audible gasp. She looked at the witcher and nodded almost 
imperceptibly. 

The man was a half-elf. 

 

*** 

 

The half-elf Schirru was tall. He measured over six feet. He wore his long, dark hair in a 
pony tail, which fell down his back. His eyes betrayed his mixed blood – large, almond-
shaped, and greenish-yellow like a cat's. 

'So you have killed the witcher,' he repeated with a dirty smile. 'And you did it sooner 
than Homer Straggen, called Nightingale? Interesting, interesting. In short, I should pay you 
fifty florens. The second instalment. So Straggen got his fifty for free. Because I doubt that 
you could get him to hand it over to you.' 

'How I deal with Nightingale is my business,' said Angouleme, who was sitting on a 
crate, letting her legs dangle. 'The contract regarding the witcher is your business. And we 
have done this thing. We, not Nightingale. The witcher is dead. His cronies, all three, are 
dead. So the contract is fulfilled.' 

'At least, you claim he is dead?' 

Angouleme kept dangling her legs. 'When I'm old,' she said in her usual brash tone, 'I'll 
write the story of my life. In it, I'll describe what transpired, with all the details. Until then 
you'll have to wait, Mr. Schirru.' 

'So you are embarrassed,' coldly observed the half-breed. 'because you killed him 
insidiously and deviously.' 

'Does that bother you?' Geralt said. Schirru looked at him cautiously. 

'No,' he said after a moment. 'The witcher Geralt of Rivia deserved no better fate. He was 
a naive fool and an idiot. If he'd had a better, more decent, honourable death there would 
have been legends made about him. But he deserves no legends.' 

'One death is the same as any other.' 

'Not always.' The half-elf shook his head, trying all the time to look into Geralt's eyes, 
which were hidden in the shadow of his hood. 'I assure you, not always. I guess you were the 
one that dealt the fatal blow.' 


Geralt did not answer. He felt an overwhelming desire to grab the half-breed by the 
ponytail, throw him to the ground, extract everything he knew from him, and then kick him 
until every tooth had been knocked out of his head. He restrained himself. The voice of 
reason told him that the mystification invented by Angouleme could produce better results. 

'As you will,' said Schirru, as he waited in vain for a reply. 'I will not insist on receiving 
a detailed report of the event. Clearly you do not want to talk about it, so it's obvious that 
nothing happened that one could boast of. Unless, of course, your silence is for an entirely 
different reason... for example – that nothing has happened. Do you perhaps have any 
evidence of the truth of your words?' 

'We cut off the dead witcher's right hand,' Angouleme replied calmly. 'But it was later 
stolen and eaten a raccoon.' 

'That was not the only thing we took' Geralt slowly fumbled under his shirt and pulled 
out his wolf's head medallion. 'The witcher wore this around his neck.' 

'Please.' 

Geralt did not hesitate long. 

The half-elf weighed the medallion in his hand. 'Now I believe it,' he said slowly. 'This 
trinket emanates strong magic. Only a witcher could have such a thing.' 

'And a witcher,' concluded Angouleme, 'would not give it away, even if his life depended 
on it. It is irrefutable proof. So, dear Lord, place the reward on the table.' 

Schirru tucked the medallion away carefully, pulled a bundle of papers from his pocket, 
placed them on the table, and smoothed them with his hand. 'Please.' 

Angouleme jumped off the crate and approached, wiggling her hips ridiculously. She 
leaned across the table – and Schirru quickly grabbed her by the hair, threw her on the table, 
and held a knife to her throat. The girl could not even cry. 

Geralt and Cahir had their swords in their hands. But too late. 

The half-elf's cronies, the musclemen with low foreheads, already had iron hooks in their 
hands. And they did not hesitate to come closer. 

'Swords on the floor,' growled Schirru. 'Both swords on the floor. Or else I will widen 
the girl's smile.' 

'Don't...' Angouleme began and ended with a scream, as the half-elf's clawed fist yanked 
her hair. He scratched her skin with his dagger and a brilliant crimson thread ran from the 
girl's neck. 

'Swords away! I'm serious!' 

'Maybe we can communicate?' Geralt ignored the rapidly rising fury inside him. He had 


decided to play the part for the time being. 'Like civilized people?' 

The half-elf gave a toxic smile. 'Communicate? With you, witcher? I was sent here to kill 
you, not to communicate with you. Yes, yes, you mutant. You came in here and wove your 
lies, but I immediately recognized you from the first moment. You've been described to me in 
detail. Can you guess who has described you so accurately? Who has given me precise 
instructions on where and in what kind of company I will find you? Oh, I'm sure you can 
guess.' 

'Let the girl go.' 

'But I know you not only from description,' continued Schirru, who had no intention of 
letting Angouleme go. 'I've seen you before. I was even on your trail, once. In Temeria. In 
July. I followed you to the town of Dorian. To the legal offices of Codringher and Fenn. Can 
you imagine that?' 

Geralt turned his sword so that light from the blade reflected into the half-elf's eyes. 'I 
wonder,' he said coldly, 'how are you going to get out of this stalemate, Schirru. I see two 
ways out. First, you let go of the girl. Second, you kill the girl... And a moment later your 
blood is spread nicely over the walls and ceiling.' 

'You have until the count of three' – Schirru brutally tore Angouleme's hair -'to lay your 
weapons on the ground. Then I start to cut the girl.' 

'We'll see how far you get with the cutting. I think not far.' 

'One!' 

'Two!' Geralt began his own count and whirled his Sihil. 

From outside, they heard shouts and the sounds of horses stamping, neighing, and 
snorting. 

'And now what?' Schirru smiled. 'I've been expecting them. This is not a stalemate, but a 
checkmate! My friends have arrived.' 

'Really?' said Cahir, looking out the window. 'I see the uniforms of the Imperial Light 
Horse.' 

'So it's a checkmate, but not for you,' said Geralt. 'You've lost, Schirru. Let the girl go.' 

'No way.' 

The door was kicked open and a dozen people stormed in, mostly black uniformed and 
homogeneous. They were led by a light-haired, bearded man, wearing an epaulet inscribed 
with a silver bear. 

'Que aen suecc's?' He asked menacingly. 'What's going on here? Who is responsible for 
this carnage? For the bodies out there? Tell me now!' 


'Sir...' 

'Glaeddyvan vort! Put your swords away!' They obeyed, because there were crossbows 
aimed at them. Angouleme, released by Schirru, tried to run from the table, but was suddenly 
grabbed by a burly, colourfully dressed man whose eyes bulged out like a frog's. She wanted 
to scream, but the man pressed his gloved fist in her mouth. 

'We avoid violence,' Geralt coldly told the leader with the bear. 'We are not criminals.' 

'Well, is that so.' 

'We act with knowledge and consent of Lord Fulk Artevelde, the governor of Riedbrune.' 

'Well, is that also so,' repeated Bear, as he gestured for Geralt's and Cahir's swords to be 
taken away. 'With the knowledge and consent of Lord Fulk Artevelde. The Honourable 
Artevelde. Did you hear that, boys?' 

His people – as joyous as the black colour they wore – burst into roars of laughter. 

Angouleme tossed herself back and forth in the grip of Frogman, trying in vain to scream. 
It was not necessary. Geralt understood. Even before the smiling Schirru began to shake 
hands with Bear. Even before four black Nilfgaardians grabbed Cahir and three others 
pointed their crossbows directly at Geralt's face. 

The Frogman, still holding Angouleme, joined his companions. The girl was hanging in 
his grasp like a rag doll. She did not even try to resist. 

Bear slowly approached Geralt and then suddenly delivered a blow with his gauntleted 
hand to the witcher's crotch. Geralt bowed, but did not fall. Cold fury kept him on his legs. 

'Perhaps it will please you to hear,' said Bear, 'that you are not the first idiot that One-
Eyed Fulk took advantage of for his own purposes. I run a lucrative business with Mr. Homer 
Straggen here, known as the Nightingale to some. Fulk is outraged that I run such a business 
and that I have appointed Homer Straggen to the Imperial Service as the leader of an infantry 
company to protect the mining industry. Since he cannot officially take revenge, he hires 
several rags to act in his stead.' 

'And a witcher,' added a wickedly grinning Schirru. 

'Outside,' Bear said aloud, 'five bodies lie in the rain. You have killed people who were 
in the Imperial Service! You have disturbed the work of the mines! I have no doubt you are 
spies, saboteurs, and terrorists. The law of war rules this territory. Under martial law, I hereby 
condemn you to death.' 

The Frogman laughed out loud. He pinned down Angouleme, and attacked her chest with 
a rapid movement. And squeezed firmly. 

'And now, Bright?' He croaked – his voice proved to be even more frog-like than his 
eyes. If the bandit had given himself his nickname, it was evidence of a sense of humour. But 


if he should ever need a disguise, the pseudonym provided an extremely effective one. 

'So we meet again!' Nightingale croaked again as he pinched Angouleme's chest. 'Are 
you happy?' 

The girl moaned in pain. 

'Where did you whore the gems and stones you stole from me?' 

'Fulk confiscated a number of entities when I was taken into custody!' shouted 
Angouleme and tried unsuccessfully to give the impression that she was not afraid. 'Sign up 
with him if you want to collect them!' 

Nightingale croaked and his eyes bulged – he now looked almost completely like a frog – 
all that was missing was for him to begin to catch flies with his tongue. He bear-hugged 
Angouleme and began to throw her back and forth. She groaned in pain. Through the red mist 
of anger in Geralt's eyes, the girl began again to resemble Ciri. 

'Grab them,' Bear said impatiently. 'Take them outside.' 

'This is a witcher,' said one of the bandits from Nightingale's mining protection company 
uncertainly. 'A dangerous type! How can we grab him with our bare hands? He could hit us 
with some magic or something...' 

'Don't worry.' Schirru patted his bag with a smile. 'He can't do magic without his 
witcher's amulet, and I have his amulet. Grab him.' 

 

*** 

 

Outside, more armed Nilfgaardians in black coats waited alongside the colourful bandits 
of Nightingale's Hanse. A group of miners had gathered. The omnipresent dogs and children 
swarmed around. 

Nightingale suddenly lost control of himself. As if the devil had entered into him. He 
angrily croaked at Angouleme, punched her, and, as she fell, kicked her several times. Geralt 
writhed in the grip of bandits, earning him a blow on his neck from something hard. 

'It was said' Nightingale croaked and hopped to and fro like a crazed toad over 
Angouleme, 'that they had placed a stake in your ass in Riedbrune, you little slut! It seems 
they could predict the future! Because you will die at the stake! Hey boys, find me a pole 
somewhere! Hurry up!' 

'Mr. Straggen' – Bear frowned -'I have no reason to have fun with a time-consuming and 
bestial looking execution. The prisoners will simply be hung...' 

He was silenced by the evil frog eyes. 


'Just be quiet, Captain,' croaked the bandit. 'I pay you too much to make such 
inappropriate remarks to me. I promised Angouleme a bad death, so now I'm going to play 
with her. If you want, then hang the other two. I don't care about them.' 

'But I do,' interrupted Schirru. 'I need them both. Above all, the witcher. Above all, him. 
And since it will take some time to put the girl on the pole, I will also use this time.' 

He stepped closer and fixed his cat's eyes on Geralt. 

'You should know, mutant,' he said, 'that I was there when your friend Codringher was 
killed in Dorian. I acted on the orders of my master, Master Vilgefortz, whom I have served 
for years. I slit him open with my knife. And that disgusting little monster Fenn – I lit him in 
the midst of his own papers and roasted him. I could have stabbed him easily, but I waited a 
while to listen to him howl and squeal. And he howled and squealed, I tell you, like a stuck 
pig. There was nothing, absolutely nothing human in that howling.' 

'Do you know why I'm telling you all this? Because I could just as easily stab you or 
allow you to be stabbed. But I'm going to devote a little time and effort. I'll listen to you cry. 
You said that one death is like any other? You'll soon see that not every death is alike. Boys, 
ignite the tar in the lubricator. And bring some chain.' 

With a dull thud, something burst against the corner of the building and immediately 
exploded into flames with a terrible roar. 

The second stone vessel filled with oil – Geralt recognized the smell – hit the lubricator 
and the third burst next to the men holding the horses. It popped and hissed flames and the 
horses panicked. It caused chaos, flames shot everywhere and dogs howled. One of 
Nightingale's bandits suddenly spread out his arms and splashed in the mud with an arrow in 
his back. 

'Long live the Free North Case!' 

On the summit of the hill, and along the scaffolds and catwalks, silhouettes darted in gray 
robes and fur-trimmed caps. More and more incendiary bombs flew down on humans, horses 
and the shacks. The braids of fire and smoke began to spread. Two landed in a workshop, on 
the wood shavings and sawdust-covered floor. 

'Long live the Free North Case! Death to the Nilfgaardian invaders!' 

Feathered arrows and bolts began to buzz. 

One of the black Nilfgaardians fell under the horses, one of Nightingale's bandits was shot 
through the throat, and one of the short haired musclemen fell to the ground with a bolt in his 
neck. With a ghoulish moan Bear fell. An arrow had struck him in the chest under the 
breastbone – his gorget was not enough protection. The arrow – although no one could know 
this – had been stolen from a military transport, and was a slightly reworked version of the 
standard arrow of the imperial army. The broad two-edged tip had been sawed in several 
places, so it splintered on impact. 


The arrowhead tore Bear's guts apart very nicely. 

One of the children was rolling in the red mud, pierced by an arrow that had been shot by 
one of the less accurate freedom fighters. One of the men holding Geralt was killed. And one 
of those who held Angouleme. The girl broke away from the other, quickly drew a knife from 
her boot, and cut with a sweeping motion. In her haste she missed Nightingale's throat, but 
made a pretty slit on his cheek, almost to the teeth. Nightingale cried instead of croaking, and 
his eyes almost bulged out of his head. He sank to his knees as blood gushed between the 
hands with which he held his face. Angouleme howled like a madman and rushed up to him 
to finish the thing, but was not able to, because the next bomb exploded between her 
Nightingale, spraying fire and stinking of smoke. 

Hissing flames raged all around – already a fiery pandemonium reigned. Horses stamped, 
whinnied and reared up. Nilfgaardians and bandits screamed. Miners ran into each other, 
confused – some were fleeing, others trying to extinguish the burning buildings. 

Geralt had already picked up Sihil from a fallen Nilfgaardian. He put a cut across the 
forehead of a tall woman in chain mail, who had just raised her arm to strike Angouleme with 
a morning star. The next, a black Nilfgaardian, came running at him with a lance and Geralt 
hit him in the thigh. He slit the throat of the next, who just stood in the way. 

Directly beside him a singed, panic-blinded horse knocked down and trampled another 
child. 

'Catch a horse! Catch a horse!' Cahir was standing beside him; together they created a 
sweeping sword strike area. Geralt did not listen to him, did not look at him. He went to the 
next Nilfgaardian, looking for Schirru. 

Angouleme, on her knees, shot a crossbow bolt three feet away into the abdomen of one 
of the bandits from the company that was supposed to protect the mining industry. Then she 
jumped up and grabbed the reins of a horse passing nearby. 

'Catch one,' cried, Cahir. 'And get out of here!' 

With an overhead blow, the witcher split the next Nilfgaardian from sternum to the waist. 
He jerked his head and hurled the blood off his eyebrows and eyelashes. 'Schirru! Where are 
you, bastard?' 

A blow. A scream. Warm droplets on his face. 

'Mercy!' wailed a man in a black uniform, who was kneeling in the mud. The witcher 
hesitated. 

'Come to your senses!' roared Cahir, grabbing him by the shoulders and shaking him 
vigorously. 'Come to your senses! Have you lost your mind?' 

Angouleme came galloping back, pulling the bridle of another horse with her. Two riders 
pursued her. One fell, struck by an arrow of a freedom fighter of the North Case. Geralt's 


sword swept the other from the saddle. 

Geralt jumped. And then, in the firelight, he saw Schirru in the midst of the screaming, 
panicking remnants of the Nilfgaardians. Beside the half-elf, Nightingale croaked and cursed, 
looking like a man-eating troll with his bloody face. 

Geralt roared in anger, turned his horse, and whirled his sword. 

Next to him Cahir cried, began to curse, and reeled in his saddle, blood running spilling 
from his forehead and instantly covering his eyes and face. 'Geralt! Help!' 

Schirru had gathered a group around him, shouting, ordering them to shoot their 
crossbows. Geralt struck his horse's bottom with the flat of his blade, ready for a suicidal 
attack. Schirru had to die. Everything else was irrelevant. Nothing else mattered. Cahir did 
not matter. Angouleme did not matter... 

'Geralt!' shouted Angouleme. 'Help Cahir!' 

He came to his senses. And he was ashamed. 

He reached for Cahir and supported him. 

Cahir wiped the blood from his face with his sleeve, but the blood once again flowed 
down it. 'It's nothing, a scratch...' His voice trembled. Get out of here, witcher... gallop after 
Angouleme... gallop!' 

Loud cries sounded from the foot of the hill – a crowd approached, armed with pickaxes, 
crowbars, and hatchets. The fellows and companions of the miners of 'RIALTO' had come to 
help – the miners from the adjacent mines – from 'HAPPY HOLE' or 'THE COMMON 
CAUSE' or from some other. Who could know? 

Geralt kicked his heels into his horse's flanks. They went in an insane gallop, terre à 
ventre. 


*** 

 

They rushed forward without looking back, clinging to the necks of their horses. The best 
horse had fallen to Angouleme, a bandit's small but spirited animal. Geralt's horse, a bay 
stallion with a Nilfgaardian bridle, began to wheeze and gasp and had trouble even keeping 
its head up. Cahir's horse, also from the military, was stronger and more enduring, but that 
made no difference because its rider was troubled. He reeled in his saddle, instinctively 
pressed his thighs together, and sprayed blood on the neck and mane of his mount. But he 
galloped on. 

Angouleme, who had left behind the two, waited for them in a bend in the road at the 
place where it went downhill, between a wall of rocks. 


'The pursuers,' she panted, with dirt smeared on her face. 'They are repositioning 
themselves, they will not leave us in peace... The miners have seen where we fled. We cannot 
stay on the road... We need to dive into the woods, where there are no paths... They depend 
on...' 

'No,' said the witcher in an alarmed voice, hearing the broken sounds from his horses 
lungs. 'We must stay on the road... On the direct and shortest route to Sansretour...' 

'Why?' 

'Now is not the time to talk. Forward! Get everything you can out of the horses...' 

They galloped. The witcher's bay stallion gasped. 

 

*** 

 

The bay was not fit to continue riding. His feet were stiff as sticks, he could barely walk, 
his flanks were heavy, and the air came out of him with a hoarse groan. Finally, he fell to his 
side, laid stiff, looked at the horsemen, and his reproachful eyes became cloudy. 

Cahir's horse was in slightly better condition, but Cahir was in even worse. He fell down 
from his saddle and picked himself up, but only on all fours. He vomited violently, although 
he did not have much left to throw up. 

When Geralt and Angouleme tried to touch his bloody head, he cried out. 

'Damn,' said the girl. 'They ruined his haircut.' 

A considerable length of the skin over the forehead and temple of the young Nilfgaardian 
was replaced by skull bones. If the blood had not already formed an adhesive, the loose skin 
would have folded down to his ear. The sight was grim. 

'How did this happen?' 

'He simply had an axe thrown at his head. And the funniest thing is, it was neither a black 
nor any of Nightingale's men, but one of the miners.' 

'It does not matter who it was,' the witcher wrapped Cahir's head tightly with a torn shirt 
sleeve. 'What is important and fortunate is that the thrower had lousy aim and only scalped 
him, or else he would have a split skull. But the skull bone has still taken some hurt. And the 
brain has noticed as well. He could not keep himself in the saddle, even if the horse could 
carry his burden.' 

'What do we do? Your horse is dead, his is as good as dead, and the sweat drips from 
mine... and we are pursued. We cannot stay here...' 


'We have to stay here. Cahir and I. And Cahir's horse. You continue riding. Quickly. 
Your horse is strong, it will withstand the gallop. And even if you have to ride it to death... 
Angouleme, somewhere in the Sansretour Valley Regis, Milva and Dandelion are waiting for 
us. They know nothing and could fall into Schirru's hands. You have to find and warn them, 
and then all four off you ride for Toussaint. They will not pursue you there. Hopefully.' 

'And you and Cahir?' Angouleme bit her lip. 'What will become of you? Nightingale is 
not stupid, and if he sees the half-dead bay, he'll ransack every hole in the area! And you 
cannot go far with Cahir!' 

'Schirru, because he is the one who follows us, will ride after you.' 

'You think so?' 

'I'm sure. Ride.' 

'What should I tell the aunt, when I show up without you?' 

'You explain it. But not to her, only to Regis. Regis will know what to do. And we... If 
Cahir's scalp adheres more firmly to his skull, then we will walk to Toussaint. We find you 
there, somehow. Well, don't wait around, girl. To the horse and away. Do not let the pursuers 
reach you. Do not let them catch sight of you.' 

'Don't teach a grandfather to cough! Hang on! Until then!' 

'Until then, Angouleme.' 

 

*** 

 

He did not move too far away from the road. He could not resist taking a look at their 
pursuers. But he basically feared no action on their part, because he knew that they wouldn't 
waste any time and would follow Angouleme. 

He was not mistaken. 

The riders passed by less than a quarter of an hour later. Although they shouted, argued, 
and rummaged through the bushes near the sight of the horse lying, they almost immediately 
took to the road again. They had undoubtedly come to the conclusion that the three fugitives 
were now riding two on a horse and that they could catch them quickly if they lost no time. 
Geralt saw that some of the pursuers' horses were not in the best condition. 

There were very few black coated Nilfgaardian light cavalry among the pursuers; it was 
dominated by Nightingale's brightly clothed bandits. Geralt couldn't make out whether 
Nightingale himself participated in the pursuit, or whether he had cleaned and bandaged his 
slashed face. 


As the sound of hooves faded into the distance, Geralt got out of his hiding place in the 
bracken, lifted the moaning and groaning Cahir, and held him steady. 'The horse is too weak 
to carry you. Can you walk?' 

The Nilfgaardian made a sound that could just as easily have been confirmation as denial. 
Or something else. But he set one foot in front of the other, and that's what mattered. 

They went down into a ravine, into a stream bed. Cahir fell down the last dozen steps on 
the slippery slope, pretty desolate as he slipped down. He crawled to the stream, drank plenty 
of water, and poured some over his bandaged head. The witcher did not urge him to hurry – 
he just breathed a deep breath, gathering strength. 

They went up the creek, where he assisted Cahir and simultaneously pulled the horse to 
be. They trudged through the water, placing their feet against rocks and fallen logs. After a 
while Cahir could go no further – he no longer obediently put one foot in front of the other, 
he no longer moved, the witcher had to drag him. They could not go on like this, especially as 
the stream bed was interrupted by waterfalls and rapids. Geralt groaned and carried the 
wounded man on his back. The horse that he towed along behind him did not make his life 
any easier either. When they finally came out of the ravine, the witcher collapsed on the wet 
forest floor and lay breathing heavily, completely exhausted, beside the groaning Cahir. He 
lay there a long time. In the back of his knee, an angry pain began to throb. 

Cahir finally showed some signs of life, and shortly afterwards – miraculously – he stood 
up, cursed himself, and held his head. They continued on. Initially Cahir moved quickly. 
Then he slowed down. Then he fell. 

Geralt took turns carrying him on his back and dragging him, groaning, pushing against 
rocks. Pain raged in his knee, and black and fiery bees swarmed in his vision. 

'A month ago...' Cahir began to moan from his back. 'Who would have thought that you 
would be carrying me on your back...' 

'Be quiet, Nilfgaardian... don't waste your strength talking...' 

When they finally reached the rocks and cliffs, it was almost dark. The witcher had not 
dared hoped to find a cave, yet he found one – he dropped powerlessly in the first available 
hole. 


*** 

 

The cavern was littered with a sole human skull, ribs, pelvis and other bones. But – more 
importantly – there were also dry branches. 

Cahir had a fever and was shaking and twitching in spasms. He bravely and confidently 
endured the suturing of the flap of skin, done with the aid of a curved needle and thread. The 


crisis came later in the night. Geralt decided to kindle a fire in the cave, ignoring the security 
issue. It was raining and storming outside, so it was hardly likely that someone roamed the 
area, watching for firelight. And Cahir and had to warm up. 

He was feverish all night. He trembled and groaned. He was delirious. Geralt could not 
sleep – he had to keep the fire going. And his knee ached with demonic pain. 

 

*** 

 

The young Nilfgaardian became stronger and stronger as the morning approached. He was 
pale and covered in sweat, and Geralt could feel the heat he gave off. His articulation was 
slightly impeded by his chattering teeth. But he spoke. And he spoke with confidence. He 
complained of a headache – a normal occurrence for someone who had been hit in the head 
with an axe and had the skin, along with the hair, severed from his head. 

Geralt divided his time between dawns and restless evenings gathering trickling rainwater 
from the rocks and birch bark bowls. Both Cahir and he were tormented by thirst. 

'Geralt?' 

'Yes.' 

Cahir straightened the logs in the fire with the help of a leg bone he had found. 

'In the mine, as we fought... I was scared, you know?' 

'I know.' 

'For a moment it looked as if you had gone berserk. As if nothing mattered to you... 
except for killing...' 

'I know.' 

'I feared,' concluded Cahir quietly, 'that you would in your state you would kill Schirru. 
And from the dead we could not gather any information.' 

Geralt cleared his throat. He liked the young Nilfgaardian more and more. Not only was 
brave, but also intelligent. 

'You've done well to send Angouleme away,' continued Cahir, rattling his teeth lightly. 
'This is not for girls... Even for those like her. This we need to do for ourselves, as a pair. We 
are chasing the consequences. But not to kill in a berserker state. You think this is for 
revenge... Geralt, revenge must not be our purpose. We need to capture this half-elf... force 
him to tell us where Ciri is...' 

'Ciri is no longer alive.' 


'That's not true. I do not believe she is dead... And you do not believe it either. Admit it.' 

'I do not believe it.' 

Outside, the storm howled and the rain roared. Inside the cave it was snug. 'Geralt?' 

'I'm listening.' 

'Ciri lives. I had another dream... Yes, something happened at the equinox, something 
fatal... Yes, no doubt, I also felt and saw... But she lives... She absolutely lives. We must 
hurry... But not to revenge and murder. To her.' 

'Yes. Yes, Cahir. You're right.' 

'And you? Have you had any more dreams?' 

'Yes,' said the witcher bitterly. 'But very rarely since we crossed the Yaruga. And I 
cannot remember them at all after waking. Something inside me has stopped, Cahir. 
Something has burned. Something inside me has been torn completely...' 

'That's okay, Geralt. I dream enough for the both of us.' 

 

*** 

 

They journeyed forth at dawn. It had stopped raining, it even looked as if the sun was 
trying to find some hole in the gray clouds that covered the sky. 

They rode slowly, together on a horse with a Nilfgaardian military bridle. 

The horse stumbled on the gravel, but did better on the steps along the shores of 
Sansretour River, which led to Toussaint. Geralt knew the way. He had been here once 
before. Much had changed. However, much had not changed – the brook in the Sansretour 
Valley still gradually more and more became the Sansretour River. The Amell Mountains still 
towered above them along with Gorgon, the Devil's Mountain. 

There were some things that simply never changed. 

 

*** 

 

'A soldier does not question commands,' said Cahir as he touched the bandage on his 
head. 'He does not analyze them, he does not think about them, and he does not expect an 
explanation of their meaning. This is the first thing they taught us soldiers. So you can you 
guess that I did not hesitate to follow the command that was given to me. Not even a fleeting 


thought in my head questioned why I should be looking for some Cintrierin princess. Orders 
are orders. Of course, I was annoyed because I wanted to win fame with the knighthood, with 
the regular army... But working for the Intelligence Service is also an honour for us. If only it 
had been a more difficult task to capture some important prisoners... But a girl?' 

Geralt threw the backbone of a trout into their camp fire. They had caught many fish the 
evening before in a creek that emptied into the Sansretour. The trout were in the spawning 
season and light. 

He listened to Cahir's story, his curiosity struggling against a deep sense of regret. 

'All in all, it was a coincidence,' said Cahir while gazing into the fire. 'The purest 
coincidence. We had, as I later learned, a spy in the court of Cintra, a chamberlain. As we 
were about to conquer the city and were preparing to besiege the castle, this spy slipped out 
and hinted that they would try to smuggle the princess out of town. There were several 
groups formed, just like mine. My group randomly encountered Ciri.' 

'It began with a chase through the city quarters, which were already burning. That was a 
real hell. Nothing but the hiss of the flames and fire walls. The horses did not want to 
continue, and neither did the people. My subordinates, there were four, began to curse, 
scream, and think I had lost my mind and would lead them to destruction... I barely managed, 
with great difficulty, to keep them under control.' 

'We continued to pursue the escapees through this boiling fire and caught up to them. 
Suddenly we had them right in front of us – five Cintrierin. And then they began to cut and 
thrust, even before I could call that they should surrender the girl. The one who carried her on 
his saddle fell first, and she landed on the ground. One of my men picked her up and pulled 
her onto his horse, but he did not get far, because one of the Cintrierins stabbed him in the 
back, all the way through his body. I saw the sword protrude an inch from Ciri's head, and 
she fell again to the ground. She was almost fainting from fear. I saw how she were pressed 
to the slain and tried to crawl under them... Like a kitten with a dead cat...' 

He paused and swallowed saliva. 'She did not even know that she clung to an enemy. To 
a comparatively hated Nilfgaardian.' 

'We were alone,' he continued, after a short pause, 'She and I, and all around nothing but 
corpses and fire. Ciri began creeping into the puddles of water and blood, but they had 
already begun to steam strongly. A house collapsed, I saw sparks and smoke, then could 
hardly see anything. The horse did not want to go there. I called out to her and asked her to 
come to me, yelling myself hoarse trying be heard over the fires roar. She saw and heard me, 
but did not react. The horse would not move forward, and I couldn't help it. I had to 
dismount. I held my hand to pick her up, but with the other I had to hold the reins. The horse 
pulled on them so violently that he nearly knocked me over. When I picked her up, she began 
to scream. Then she stiffened and fainted. I wrapped her in a coat that had been soaked in a 
puddle, mud, filth and blood. And away we rode. Straight through the fire.' 

'I do not know by what miracle we found our way out of there. But we suddenly emerged 


found ourselves at the river. Unfortunately, at the place where the Nordlings were fleeing. I 
threw away my officer's helmet, because even though the wings were burned, they would 
have immediately recognized me. The rest of my uniform was so scorched that it could not 
betray me. But if the girl would regained consciousness and would have screamed, they 
would have massacred me. I was lucky.' 

'I rode a mile with them, then stayed behind and hid in the bushes next to the river, which 
constantly carried corpses by.' 

He paused, cleared his throat, and felt his bandaged head with both hands. And he 
blushed. Or perhaps it was only the reflection of the flames? 

'Ciri was terribly dirty. I had to clean her... She did not resist, did not scream. She 
trembled, her eyes were closed. Every time I touched her to wash or dry, she tensed and 
stiffened... I knew I should talk to her and she might calm down... But suddenly I could not 
find any words in your language... In the language of my mother, which I've known since 
childhood. I could not find any words, so I wanted to calm her down by contact, by 
gentleness... But she stiffened and whimpered... as a young bird...' 

'She had nightmares about that,' whispered Geralt. 

'I know. Me too.' 

'What was next?' 

'She fell asleep. And I also. From exhaustion. When I awoke, she was no longer with me. 
She was nowhere. The rest I do not remember. Those who found me claimed that I was 
running in circles and crying like a wolf. They had to tie me up. When I calmed down, people 
took me in front of the Enlightenment, the subordinates of Vattier de Rideaux. They were 
concerned about Cirilla. Where she was, where and whither she had fled, the manner in 
which she had fled from me, why I let her escape. And again, from the beginning: Where she 
was, where she had fled... I cried with anger against an emperor who likes chasing little girls. 
I cried for a year while sitting in a cell in the Citadel. But then I was pardoned, because I was 
needed. On Thanedd, someone was needed who spoke the common language and knew how 
Ciri looks. The Emperor wanted me to go to Thanedd... And this time could not fail. I had to 
bring him Ciri.' He paused. 

'Emhyr gave me a chance. I could not refuse it. That would have meant absolute, total, 
lifelong disgrace and exile. I could not refuse, even had I wanted to. And I did not want to 
refuse. Because you know, Geralt... I could not forget her.' 

'I'm not going to lie. I've seen her constantly in dreams. Rather than the skinny child she 
was on the river when I washed her. I have... I see her still, as a woman – beautiful, confident, 
provocative... With details such as a fire-red rose tattooed in her groin...' 

'What are you talking about?' 

'I do not know, do not know myself... But it was and still is. I see her still in the dreams, 


just as I had seen her in a dream back then... So I agreed to take the mission on Thanedd. 
That's why I wanted to join you later. I... I still want to once again... to see her once again, to 
touch her hair, to look into her the eyes... I want to see her. Strike me dead if you want. But 
I'm going to stop pretending. I think... I think I love her. I beg you, do not laugh.' 

'I am not laughing.' 

'This is the reason why I ride with you. Do you understand?' 

'Do you want her for yourself or for your Emperor?' 

'I'm a realist,' he whispered. 'I could never marry her. But as the wife of the Emperor, I 
could at least see her every now and then.' 

'As a realist,' snorted the witcher, 'you have to see that we must first find her and save. 
Assuming that your dreams do not lie and Ciri really still alive.' 

'I know. And when we find her? What then?' 

'We'll see. We'll see, Cahir.' 

'Lead me not astray. Be honest. You're not going to allow me to take her.' 

Geralt did not answer. 

Cahir did not repeat the question. 'Until then,' he asked coldly, 'can we be friends?' 

'Yes, Cahir. I ask again for forgiveness for what happened. I don't know what got into me. 
Actually, I did not seriously suspect you of treason or of double crossing us.' 

'I'm not a traitor. I will never betray you, witcher.' 

 

*** 

 

They rode through the deep gorge of the Sansretour River, now fast and wide, which cut 
between the rocks. They rode to the east, towards the border of the principality of Toussaint. 
The Gorgon, the Devil's Mountain, rose above them. They would have had to cover their 
heads to look at the summit. But they did not look. 

 

*** 

 

First, they smelled the smoke. A little later they saw the fire and rods, on which roasted 
trout were skewered. Then they saw the individual who was sitting alone by the fire. 


 

*** 

 

Not long ago, Geralt would have mercilessly ridiculed, mocked, and held for an idiot 
anyone who dared to claim that he, a witcher, would feel great joy at the sight of a vampire. 

'Oho,' said Emiel Regis Rohellec Terzieff-Godefroy, who had just straightened a rod. 
'Look what the wind just blew in.' 

 

*** 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


Knocker: also called a pukacz, coblynau, polterduk, karkonos, rubezahl or skarbnik, is a 
variant of the Kobol, however, it excels in size and power. P. usually wears immense beards. 
P. live in tunnels in the earth, caves, caverns, rocky abysses and labyrinths. P. usually dwell 
in lands that are full of hidden riches, such as, precious stones, ores, carbon, natural oil or 
salt. Therefore, P. can often be encountered in mines, particularly abandoned, but also in 
actives ones where they like to show off. P. are conniving pests and are spoilers and 
nuisances and cause havoc for miners by wrecking machines, tapping on rocks to frighten, 
collapsing tunnels, stealing mining equipment and tools, and even sneaking up behind miners 
and hitting them in the head. 

However, it is possible to bride them so as not to cause mischief above an acceptable level. 
The best is to lay down in a dark tunnel some bread and butter, sheep cheese or a portion of 
smoked fish. The best of all is a brandy flask, because it is sweet and the P. are terribly 
greedy. 

 

Physiologus 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


