Chapter Nine 

 

 

'They're coming! They're coming!' 

Yennefer held her damp, wind-ruffled hair firmly with both hands and went to railing to 
look down on the stairs leading to the beach, brushing women out of her way. The wave, 
driven by the west wind, broke thunderously on the shore. White sparkling fountains shot up 
again and again from the crevices between the rocks. 'They're coming! They're coming!' 

Almost the entire archipelago was visible from the upper terraces of the citadel of Kaer 
Trolde, the main fortress of Ard Skellig. Straight ahead, across the sound, was An Skellig – 
low and flat on the south side and covered by steep fjords on the north. To the left, far away, 
the sharp tusks and high cliffs of green Spikeroog rose above the waves; the peaks 
disappearing in the clouds. To the right one could see the steep cliffs of the island Undvik, on 
which swarmed gulls, petrels, cormorants, and gannets. Behind Undvik peeped the wooded 
cone of Hindarsfjall, the smallest island of the archipelago. And if one climbed up to the top 
of the towers of Kaer Trolde and looked in a southerly direction, one would see another 
island – the lonely, secluded island of Faroe. It jutted from the water like the back of a giant 
fish rising out of the flat ocean. 

Yennefer went down to the lower terraces and halted amongst a group of women whose 
pride and social status prevented them from running headlong to the beach and mixing with 
the excited mob. From there, the alluvium seaport spread black and shapeless, like the shaft 
of a sea crab. 

From the sound between An Skellig and Spikeroog appeared the dragon boats, one after 
another. Their red and white sails blazed in the sunlight and the bronze shields hanging on 
their sides flashed. 

'The 'Ring Horn' comes first,' lectured one of women. 'Then the 'Fenris'...' 

The 'Trigla',' acknowledged another in an excited voice. 'Then the 'Drac'... Behind 
them, the 'Havfru'...' 

'The 'Anghira'... 'Tamara'... 'Daria'... No, that is the 'Scorpena'... the 'Daria' is 
missing. The 'Daria' is missing...' 

A young, pregnant woman with a thick blond braid supported her belly with both hands, 
moaned, turned a dull, pale colour, and fainted, falling on the boards of the terrace like a 
ragged curtain from its rings. Yennefer jumped out immediately, sank to her knees, and 
pressed her fingers against the abdomen of the woman. She shouted a spell to suppress the 
spasms and convulsions, and to strongly secure the tissue of the uterus and placenta together 
against the force that threatened to tear them apart. For safety, she laid a soothing spell on the 


child, whose legs she could feel kicking under her hands. 

In order not to waste her magic strength, she brought the woman to consciousness with a 
slap to the face. 'Take her away. Carefully.' 

'Such a fool...' said one of the elderly women. 'What was she thinking...' 

'Quite headless... Perhaps her man lives, maybe he is in a different boat...' 

'Thank you for your help, Lady Sorceress.' 

'Take her away,' Yennefer repeated and stood up. She stifled a curse as she realized that 
her kneeling had caused her dress seam to burst. 

She was still on the lower terrace. The dragon boats now ran onto the beach, one after the 
other, and the soldiers came ashore – the Skellige berserkers, bearded and draped with 
weapons. Many wore white bandages. Many could only walk with the help of their 
companions. Some had to be carried. 

The women huddled on the banks of Skellige began to recognize their men. If they were 
lucky, they shouted and cried with happiness. If they were not, they fainted. Or they departed 
– slowly, quietly, and without a word of complaint. Sometimes they looked around; hoping 
the red and white sails of the 'Daria' would flash in the sound. 

The 'Daria' was missing. 

Towering over the other heads of red hair, Yennefer recognized Crach an Craite, the Earl 
of Skellige, who was one of the last to come ashore from the 'Ring Horn'. The Earl shouted 
commands, gave orders, checked, and looked after various issues. Two women watched him, 
one blond and the other dark haired. They wept. With happiness. When he was finally 
convinced that he had taken care of everything, the Earl went to the women, gave them a bear 
hug, and kissed them both. And then he looked up and saw Yennefer. His eyes began to 
gleam like the back of a brass plates and his sunburned face was as hard as the rock of a reef. 

He knows, thought the sorceress. News travels fast. The Earl found out, while he was on 
tour, that I had been caught in a net yesterday, in the sound behind Spikeroog. He knew he 
would find me in Kaer Trolde. 

Magic or pigeons? 

He approached her slowly. He smelled of the sea, salt, tar, and fatigue. She looked into his 
bright eyes, and immediately her ears rang with the war cry of berserkers, the fragmenting of 
shields, the clanking of swords and axes. The roar of the slain. The roar of the people who 
jumped from the burning 'Daria' into the sea. 

'Yennefer of Vengerberg.' 

'Crach an Craite, Earl of Skellige.' She made a slight bow before him. 


He did not return the bow. Not good, she thought. 

At that moment he saw her bruise, a reminder of a blow with the oar, and again his face 
hardened. His lips quivered and for a moment she could see his teeth. 'Whoever hit you will 
pay for it.' 

'No one hit me. I stumbled on the stairs.' 

He looked at her attentively, then shrugged his shoulders. 'If you do not want to lodge a 
complaint, you do not have to. I have no time to launch an investigation. And now listen to 
what I have to say. Listen attentively, because these will be the only words that I say to you.' 

'I'm listening.' 

'Tomorrow you will be put on a dragon boat and taken to Novigrad. There, you will be 
passed to the city government and later the government of Temeria or Redania, whoever 
reaches you first. I know both have an equally strong desire to talk to you.' 

'Is that all?' 

'Almost. Just a statement that you deserve, yes. The Skellige Islands has quite often 
granted asylum to people who were persecuted by the law. The islands do not lack options 
and opportunities to atone for debts by hard work, courage, sacrifice, and blood. But not in 
your case, Yennefer. Perhaps you expected such, but I'll grant you no political asylum. I hate 
those such as yourself. I hate people who stir for power's sake, who put their self-interest 
above all others, conspiring with the enemy and betraying those to whom they owe not only 
obedience, but also gratitude. I hate you, Yennefer, because when you and your Nilfgaardian 
cronies staged the uprising on Thanedd, my dragon boats were in Attre. My boys were 
supporting the rebels there. Three hundred of my men stood against two thousand blacks! 
There must be a reward for bravery and loyalty, and a punishment for wickedness and 
treachery! How should I reward those killed? With cenotaphs? Inscriptions carved into 
obelisks? No! I will reward the honoured dead differently. Their blood, which flowed into the 
dunes of Attre, will be paid for by your blood, Yennefer, flowing through the planks of the 
scaffold.' 

'I am innocent. I did not participate in the conspiracy of Vilgefortz.' 

'You can present the evidence to the judges. I will not judge you.' 

'You've not only judged. You've even set the punishment.' 

'Enough talk! I said, tomorrow at dawn you will be taken in chains to Novigrad, before 
the royal court. To receive just punishment. But now give me your word that you will not try 
to use magic.' 

'And if I do not give my word?' 

'Marquard, our magician, was killed on Thanedd. We now have no magicians here who 


could keep you under control. But you should know that you will be under the constant 
surveillance of the best archers of Skellige. If you make even a suspicious hand gesture, you 
will be shot.' 

'Okay.' She nodded. 'I give my word.' 

'Very good. Thank you. Farewell, Yennefer. I will not see you off tomorrow.' 

'Crach.' 

 He turned on his heel. 'I'm listening.' 

'I have not the slightest intention of getting on board a ship bound for Novigrad. I have no 
time to prove to Dijkstra that I am innocent. I cannot risk that the evidence is already 
prepared for my case. I cannot risk that I will die shortly after the arrest of a sudden cerebral 
haemorrhage, or commit suicide in my cell in a spectacular way. I can lose no time or take 
such risks. I can't explain why I cannot afford to take such risks. But I will not go to 
Novigrad.' 

He looked at her for a long time. 

'You will not,' he repeated. 'What could make you think you would be allowed this 
exception? Perhaps, that we once had a loving relationship? Do not count on that Yennefer. 
The past is the past and was not written into the register.' 

'I know, and I do not count on it. I'm not going to Novigrad, Earl, because I rush to the 
aid of a person who urgently needs me. A person whom I have sworn to never leave alone 
and unaided. And you, Crach an Craite, Earl of Skellige, will help with my endeavour. After 
all, you've made a similar vow. Ten years ago. To the same person. Ciri, the granddaughter of 
Calanthe. The lion cub of Cintra. I, Yennefer of Vengerberg, care for Ciri as my daughter. 
That is why I am asking, on her behalf, that you keep your oath. The oath of Crach an Craite, 
Earl of Skellige.' 

 

*** 

 

'Really?' Crach an Craite asked in amazement. 'You're not even going to try them? Not 
one of these tasty morsels?' 

'Really.' 

The Earl did not insist as he helped himself to a lobster from a shallow bowl, put it on the 
table, and struck it with a powerful but unerringly precise blow that cleaved the length of it. 
After he had poured plenty of lemon juice and garlic over it, he began to pick the meat out of 
the shell. With his fingers. 


Yennefer ate in a mannered fashion, with a silver knife and a fork – but she ate a mutton 
chop, which had surprised and probably offended the chef who had specially prepared the 
meal for them. For the sorceress wanted neither oysters nor mussels, or the au-jus marinated 
salmon, or the soup of Trigli and cockles, or the steamed tail of angler fish, or even the baked 
swordfish, braised eel, octopus, crab, lobster, or seaurchins. And also – especially – no fresh 
algae. 

Anything that even remotely smelled of the sea reminded her of Fringilla Vigo and 
Philippa Eilhart – of the insanely risky teleportation, the fall in the waves, and the swallowed 
sea water. The way the algae floated in the bowl also reminded her of something. Of the 
algae that had been beaten to a pulp on her head and shoulders by the crippling painful blows 
of pine oars. 

'So I,' Crach took up the conversation again, as he sucked the flesh from the broken leg 
joints of the lobster, 'have decided to trust you, Yennefer. You should know I do not do this 
for your sake. The Bloedgeas, the blood oath that I gave in front of Calanthe, practically 
binds my hands. So if you plan to help Ciri, genuinely and honestly – which I assume is true 
– it seems to me that I have no choice but to help you in this endeavour...' 

'Thank you. But please spare me that pathetic tone. I repeat: I did not participate in the 
conspiracy on Thanedd. Trust me.' 

He waved his hand. 'Is it so important what I think? You would do better to start with the 
kings and their agents around the world, like Dijkstra. Then Philippa Eilhart and the loyal 
magicians. Who, as you yourself have admitted, you already faced and as a result have fled 
here to Skellige. You must have presented the evidence you had...' 

'I have no evidence,' she interrupted him and angrily poked her fork in the sprouts, which 
the cook had added to the insulting lamb chops. 'And if I did, I would not present it. I can't 
explain what binds me to silence. But believe me, Crach. I beg you.' 

'I told you...' 

'You did', she cut him off. 'You told me you would help me. Thank you. But you still do 
not believe in my innocence. Believe it.' 

Crach eyed the last morsels in the lobster shell and then moved on to the bowl of mussels. 
He poked and rattled around inside the bowl, searching for the largest. 

'Agreed,' he said finally, wiping his hands on the tablecloth. 'I believe it. Because I want 
to believe it. But asylum and refuge, I will not grant you. I cannot. You can leave the Skellige 
Islands whenever and to wherever you want. I would recommend hurrying. You are here, as 
we say 'on the wings of magic'. Others may arrive on your trail. They also know the spells.' 

'I do not seek asylum or safe haven, Earl. I search. I must hurry to help Ciri.' 

'Ciri,' he repeated thoughtfully. 'The lion cub... She was a strange child.' 


'Was?' 

'Oh.' Again he waved his hand. 'I spoke poorly. 'Was' because she is no longer a child. I 
did not mean to upset you. Cirilla, the lion cub of Cintra... She spent a summer and a winter 
in Skellige. More than once she caused chaos – but hey! That was an imp, not a lion cub... 
Damn, I already said... Yennefer, various rumours have reached us from the mainland... 
Some say that Ciri is in Nilfgaard...' 

'She's not in Nilfgaard.' 

'Others say that the girl is no more.' 

 Yennefer remained silent, biting her lip. 

'But with this second rumour', the Earl said firmly, 'I disagree. Ciri lives. I'm sure of it. 
There has been no proof whatsoever... She is alive!' 

Yennefer raised her eyebrows, but asked no questions. For a long time they were silent, 
listening to the roar of the waves crashing against the cliffs of Ard Skellig. 

'Yennefer,' Crach said after a while. 'There are other messages that have come from the 
continent. I understand that your witcher, who stayed in Brokilon after the fight on Thanedd, 
has set out from there to reach Nilfgaard and liberate Ciri.' 

'I repeat, Ciri is not in Nilfgaard. And what my witcher, as you call him, intends to do, I 
do not know. But he... Crach, it's no secret that he and I... that I am sympathetic to him. But I 
know he will not save Ciri. He will achieve nothing. I know him. He'll get caught up, lost in 
his own philosophizing, and wallow in self pity. He'll vent his anger and hack at anyone and 
anything he comes across. Then, in expiation, he'll do some grand, but pointless deed. In the 
end, he'll be slain, stupidly and needlessly, most likely by a stab in the back.' 

'It is said', Crach threw in quickly, frightened by the ominous changes and strange 
trembling voice of the sorceress, 'that Ciri is his destiny. I've seen it myself, back in Cintra, at 
Pavetta's betrothal...' 

'Predestination,' Yennefer sharply interrupted him, 'can be interpreted in different ways. 
Very different ways. However, time is too precious for such discussions. I repeat, I do not 
know what he's up to and whether Geralt intends anything. I accept that. In my own way. 
And act, Crach, act. I do not care to sit here, crying and holding my head in my hands. I will 
act!' 

The Earl raised his eyebrows, but said nothing. 

'I will act', repeated the sorceress. 'I've been thinking of a plan. And you, Crach, will help 
me, true to the oath that you have taken.' 

'I'm ready,' he announced firmly. 'Right now. The dragon boats are in the harbour. 
Command, Yennefer.' 


She could not resist bursting into laughter. 

'Still the old man. No, Crach, no proof of courage and manliness is required. There will 
be no need to go to Nilfgaard and hew the golden door latch of their cities with an axe. I need 
less spectacular help. But more concrete... How are things with your treasury?' 

'What?' 

'Earl Crach an Craite. The help I need can be converted into currency.' 

 

*** 


It started the next day, when it was light. In the rooms that had been made available to 
Yennefer a mad hustle dominated and Seneschal Guthlaf accommodated the sorceress only 
with great difficulty. 

Yennefer sat at a table and barely looked up from her papers. She counted and summed 
columns of presented invoices, which had been hurried from the Treasury and the island's 
branch of the Cianfanelli Bank. She sketched and drew, and the drawings and designs were 
immediately handed over to the artisans – alchemists, goldsmiths, glass blowers, and 
jewellers. 

For a while everything went smoothly, then the trouble started. 

 

*** 


'I'm sorry, Lady Sorceress,' said Seneschal Guthlaf. 'What is not is not. We have given 
you all that we had. You might be able to accomplish miracles and magic, but not us! Now, 
I'd like to note that the diamonds laid out before are worth a total value of...' 

'What good is their value to me?' She hissed. 'I have need of a diamond, but it must be 
big. How so, Master?' 

The jeweller looked again at the drawing. 'To do such and to cut such facets? At least 
thirty carats.' 

'Such a stone', Guthlaf stated categorically, 'does not exist on Skellige.' 

'That's not true,' disagreed the jeweller. 'There is one.' 

 

*** 



'How do you imagine that I do that, Yennefer?' Crach an Craite frowned. 'Shall I send 
out soldiers to take this temple by storm and plunder? Should I threaten the priestesses with 
my wrath if they do not give up the diamond? This is not an option. I'm not particularly 
religious, but a temple is a temple and priests are priests. I can only ask politely. I can specify 
how much it means to me and how big my gratitude will be. But it will always be only a 
request. A modest, humble request.' 

'A request may be granted?' 

'Yes. An attempt will do no harm. What is there to lose? We two will travel to 
Hindarsfjall and recite this request. I will let the priestesses understand that I am keen. And 
then it's up to you. Negotiate. Argue. Try bribery. Appeal to the ambition. Appeal to your 
common professions. Cry despairingly, twist into convulsions, excite pity... In all, act like a 
monkfish. Shall I give lessons, Yennefer?' 

'There is no use, Crach. A sorceress will never find a common ground with a priestess. 
Both are too certain about... ideological differences. And to allow a sorceress to use a 'holy' 
relic or artefact... No, forget it. There is no chance...' 

'What do you need with this diamond anyway?' 

'To build a 'window' for telecommunications. That is, a megascope. I have to convince a 
couple of people to agree with me.' 

'Magic? Over long distance?' 

'If it would be sufficient to climb the highest tower of Kaer Trolde and shout out loud, I 
would not bother you.' 

 

*** 

 

The gulls and petrels screamed as they circled over the water. On the steep rocks and reefs 
of Hindarsfjall, the penetrating chirps of nesting Red-billed Oystercatchers mixed with the 
hoarse croaking and chattering of Yellow-Headed Booby's. A black Sea Cormorant with her 
bonnet observed the approaching ship with sparkling green eyes. 

'That huge rock towering over the water' – explained Crach an Craite as he leaned on the 
railing – 'is Kaer Hemdall, the guardian Hemdall who shall be awakened. Hemdall is our 
mythical hero. According to legend, when Tedd Deireádh comes – the time of the end, the 
time of the white cold and storms of the wolf, Hemdall will awaken to battle the evil powers 
of the land of Morhögg – the spectres, demons and phantoms of chaos. He will stand upon a 
rainbow bridge and blow his horn as a sign that it is time to take up arms and march. To Ragh 
Nar Roog, the last battle, which will decide whether the night falls down or the morning 
comes.' 


The ship danced through the waves and slipped into the calmer waters of a bay between 
the guardian Hemdall's rock and another, just as fantastically shaped. 

'The smaller rock is Kambi,' said the Earl. 'Kambi, in our myths, is a golden rooster that 
crows to awaken Hemdall and warn him that Naglfar is approaching, the infernal dragon ship 
that carries the army of Chaos – the demons and spectres from Morhögg. Naglfar is built 
from the fingernails of the dead. You wouldn't believe it Yennefer, but there are still people 
on the Skellige Islands who cut off dead men's nails before a funeral, in order to prevent the 
spectres of Morhögg from receiving building materials. 

'I believe it. I know the power of legends.' 

The fjord shielded them somewhat from the wind and the sails began to beat. 

'Blast the horn,' Crach ordered the crew. 'Let the holy women know that we come to 
visit.' 

 

*** 

 

The building, which was at the upper end of a long stone staircase, looked like a giant 
hedgehog – it was overgrown with so much of moss, ivy, and shrubbery. Up on its roof, 
Yennefer noticed not only shrubs, but even small trees. 

'There is the temple now,' confirmed Crach. 'The grove that surrounds it is also a place of 
worship. Here, take forth the sacred mistletoe. On Skellige, as you know, everything is 
decorated with mistletoe, from the cradle of the newborn to the grave... Watch out, the stairs 
are slippery... religion, hehe, overgrown with moss... Come, I'll take you by the arm... Still 
the same kind of perfume... Yenna...' 

'Crach. I beg you. The past is the past and was not written into the register.' 

'Forgive me. Let's go.' 

A couple of young and silent priestesses waited in front of the temple. The Earl greeted 
them politely and expressed a desire to speak with their leader, who he called Modron 
Sigrdrifa. They went inside, which was illuminated by beams of light that shone through 
high-lying glass windows. One of these beams of light illuminated the altar. 

'A hundred monkfish,' muttered Crach an Craite. 'I forgot how great it is, this 
Brisingamen. I have not been here since my childhood... with this you could probably buy all 
the shipyards in Cidaris. Together with the work of the people and annual production.' 

The Earl was exaggerating. But not by much. 

Above the modest marble altar, over the figures of cats and hawks, on the stone shell of 


the votive offerings, rose the statue of Modron Freyja, The Great Mother, in her typical 
motherly aspect – a woman in flowing robes, her pregnancy revealed and exaggerated by one 
of the sculptors. With her head bowed and facial features covered with a cloth. Above the 
folded hands on her breast was a diamond the goddess was wearing as part of a golden 
necklace. The diamond had a slightly bluish hue. It was large. Very large. 

An estimated one hundred and fifty carats. 

'One would not even need cut it,' whispered Yennefer. 'It has a rosette cut, exactly what I 
need. Just the right facets for the refraction of light...' 

'That means we're in luck.' 

'Hardly. Here they are priestesses, and I'm a ungodly witch to be thrown out in disgrace.' 

'You're exaggerating?' 

'Not a bit.' 

'Be welcome, Earl, in the temple of the Mother. Be thou also welcome, worthy Yennefer 
of Vengerberg.' 

Crach an Craite bowed. 'Hail, Revered Mother Sigrdrifa.' 

The priestess was tall, almost as big as Crach – and that meant that she was a head taller 
than Yennefer. She had light hair and eyes, and an elongated, not very pretty and not very 
womanly face. 

I have seen her somewhere, thought Yennefer. Recently. Where? 

'On the steps of Kaer Trolde, leading to the seaport,' the priestess reminded her, smiling. 
'When the ships arrived in the sound. I stood over you as you helped a pregnant woman who 
was about to lose her child. On your knees, without worrying about your very expensive 
camlet dress. I saw that. And will never again tell stories of callous and calculating 
sorceresses.' 

Yennefer cleared her throat and bowed her head. 

'You stand before the altar of the Mother, Yennefer. So you might be given her grace.' 

'Revered Mother, I... I would humbly ask you...' 

'Do not say anything. Earl, you no doubt have a lot to do. Leave us alone, here on 
Hindarsfjall. We are able to communicate. We are women. It does not matter what profession 
we pursue or who we are: We are virgins, mothers, and crones. Kneel down next to me, 
Yennefer. Bow your head to the Mother.' 

 

*** 


'Take the Brisingamen from the Goddess' neck?' Repeated Sigrdrifa, the disbelief in her 
voice battling holy outrage. 'No, Yennefer. That is simply impossible. It does not even matter 
that I would not dare... Even if I would dare, the Brisingamen cannot be removed. The 
necklace has no clasp. It is connected with the statue.' 

Yennefer remained silent for a long moment, measuring the priestess with a calm eye. 'If 
I had known,' she said coldly, 'I would have left immediately with the Earl for Ard Skellig. 
No, no, I think the time I spent talking to you was by no means wasted. But I have very little 
of it. Truly, very little. I confess, your kindness and warmth misled me a little...' 

'I wish you well,' Sigrdrifa interrupted her indifferently. 'Also, I approve of your plans, 
with all my heart. I knew Ciri. I loved that child, her fate moved me. I admire you for the 
determination with which you rush to help the child. I will fulfil your every wish. But not the 
Brisingamen, Yennefer. Not the Brisingamen. Please, do not ask.' 

'Sigrdrifa, to come to Ciri's rescue I have to quickly acquire some knowledge. Some 
information. Without it, I am powerless. Knowledge and information that I can only get in the 
way of telecommunications. In order to communicate over long distances, I need to construct, 
with the help of magic, a magic artefact. A megascope.' 

'A device such as your famous crystal ball?' 

'Much more complicated. A crystal ball allows telecommunications only with a different 
ball that has been attuned to it. A dwarf at the local bank even has a crystal ball – to 
communicate with the ball in the vault. A megascope offers somewhat greater opportunities... 
But why theorize? Without the diamond it does not matter anyway. Well, I'll say goodbye...' 

'Not so fast.' 

Sigrdrifa got up, walked through the nave, and stopped in front of the altar and the statue 
of Modron Freyja. 'The Goddess,' she said, 'is also the patron of psychics. Of clairvoyant 
women. Of telepaths. This is symbolized by the sacred animals: the cat who watches and 
listens in secret, and the falcon, who looks down from high above. It is symbolized by the 
jewel of the Goddess: the Brisingamen, the collar of clairvoyance. Why build any seeing and 
listening devices, Yennefer? Is not it easier to turn to the Goddess for help?' 

Yennefer restrained herself from cursing at the last moment. After all, this was a place of 
worship. 

'It is almost time for the evening prayer,' continued Sigrdrifa. 'Together with the other 
priestesses, I will dedicate my time to meditation. I'm going to ask the Goddess to help Ciri. 
For Ciri was here in this temple many a time and has many a time seen the Brisingamen on 
the neck of the Great Mother. Sacrifice another hour or two of your valuable time, Yennefer. 
Stay here with us for the time of prayer. Support me while I pray. With your thoughts and 
your presence.' 

'Sigrdrifa...' 


'Please. Do it for me. And for Ciri.' 

 

*** 

 

The jewelled Brisingamen. On the neck of the Goddess. 

She stifled a yawn. At least if there were any songs, any petitions, any mysteries... some 
mystical folklore... it would be less boring, sleep would not impose itself in this way. But they 
just kneel there and put their heads down. Motionless, Silent. 

But yes, they can use the Power if they want to, sometimes no worse than we sorceresses. 
It is still a mystery how they do it. No preparation, no training, no studies... Only prayer and 
meditation. Divination? A kind of self-hypnosis? That's what Tissaia de Vries claimed... They 
unconsciously enter a trance and gain energy and the ability to manipulate it, much like we 
do with our spells. They convert that energy and see this as a gift and the grace of God. That 
belief gives them strength. 

Why are we sorceresses never successful in the same way? 

Should I try it? Make use of the atmosphere and the aura of this place? I might even be 
put in a trance... I needed only to look at that diamond... the Brisingamen... To concentrate 
on how brilliantly it would play its part in my megascope... 

Brisingamen... It sparkles like the morning star, there in the dark, the smoke of incense 
and smoky candles... 

'Yennefer.' 

She lifted her head suddenly. 

It was dark in the temple. It smelled strongly of smoke. 

'Did I fall asleep? Forgive me...' 

'There is nothing to forgive. Come with me.' 

Outside, the sky flashed with flickering lights that were changing like a kaleidoscope. 
Northern Lights? Yennefer rubbed her eyes in surprise. Aurora Borealis? In August? 

'How much will you sacrifice Yennefer?' 

'What?' 

'Are you willing to sacrifice yourself? Your priceless magic?' 

'Sigrdrifa,' she said angrily. 'Do not try these hackneyed tricks with me. I'm ninety-four 
years old. But please, do not treat that as a confession. I trust you just to let you know that 


you cannot treat me like a child.' 

'You have not answered my question.' 

'And I will not. Because I do not agree with this mysticism. I fell asleep at your service. I 
got bored. Because I do not believe in your goddess.' 

Sigrdrifa turned around, and Yennefer involuntarily took a very deep breath. 

'Your disbelief is not too flattering for me', said the woman, whose eyes were full of 
liquid gold. 'But does your disbelief do anything?' 

The only action Yennefer could take was to exhale. 

'A time will come,' said the golden-eyed woman, 'when no one, absolutely no one except 
children will believe in witches. I say this to be deliberately malicious. As revenge. Let's go.' 

'No...' Yennefer was finally able to break through the passive inhalation and exhalation. 
'No! I will not go anywhere. Enough! This is an enchantment or hypnosis. An illusion! A 
trance! I have trained defence mechanisms... I can let everything be scattered with only a 
saying, oh yes! Damn...' 

The golden-eyed woman approached. The diamond on her necklace flared like the 
morning star. 

'Your language gradually ceases to serve mutual understanding,' she said. 'It is art for 
art's sake, all the more incomprehensible, the deeper and wiser you try to be. Really, you 
would do better to say nothing but 'ah-ah' and 'gu-gu'. Come on.' 

'It's an illusion, a trance... I will not go anywhere!' 

'I will not force you. That would be shameful. You're an intelligent, proud girl. Have 
character.' 

A plain. A sea of grass. Heath. A rock that rises from the heather like the back of a 
lurking predator. 

'You have asked for my jewel, Yennefer. I cannot give it to you, not without making sure 
of certain things beforehand. I want to see what's inside you. That's why I brought you here, 
to this place, which has been a place of knowledge and power from time immemorial. Your 
priceless magic is supposed to be everywhere. All you have to do is reach out for it. Are you 
afraid to stretch for it?' 

Yennefer could not bring any sound out of her constricted throat. 

'The power to change the world cannot be named,' said the woman, 'Yet you recognize 
chaos, art, and science? Curses, blessings, and progress? But coincidentally not faith? Love? 
Sacrifice? 

Are you listening? The rooster Kambi crows. The wave hits the shore, the bow wave of 


Naglfar. Hemdall will sound his horn on the rainbow Bifrost for those who would face the 
enemy. It is the white cold, the storm winds, and blowing snow... The ground shakes from the 
violent movements of the snake... 

The wolf swallows the sun. The moon is black. There is only cold and darkness. Hatred, 
revenge, and blood... 

Whose side will you choose, Yennefer? Will you be at the eastern or the western edge of 
Bifrost? Will you be with Hemdall or against him? 

The rooster Kambi crows. 

Make up your mind Yennefer. Make your choice. For one once gave you life so that you 
could make your choice at the right moment. 

Light or dark?' 

'Good and evil, light and dark, order and chaos? These are just symbols, but in reality 
there is no such polarity! Light and darkness are in each, a little of this and a little of that. 
This conversation is pointless. Pointless. I'm not going to convert to mysticism. For you or 
for the wolf that devours the sun, Sigrdrifa. For me, this is an eclipse. And so it should 
remain.' 

'Remain? How?' 

She felt the earth slip away under her feet, felt the monstrous force twist her arms and 
break the joints in her shoulders and elbows, felt the vortex as the Strappado-Torture 
stretched. She screamed in pain, writhing, opening her eyes. No, this was no dream. This 
could be no dream. She was on a tree, hanging crucified on the branches of a huge ash tree. 
Above her, high up, a hawk circled, and on the ground in the darkness she heard a hissing 
snake, the rustle of her rubbing against other joints. 

Something moved beside her. Next to her arm was a stretched and anguished squirrel. 

'Are you ready now?' Asked the squirrel. 'Are you willing to sacrifice? What are you 
willing to sacrifice?' 

'I have nothing!' The pain blinded and paralyzed her. 'And even if I had anything I do not 
believe in the meaning of such sacrifice! I do not want to suffer for millions! I do not want to 
suffer at all! For anybody!' 

'No one wants to suffer. But that is the fate of each. And some suffer more. Not 
necessarily of their own volition. It's not about to enduring the suffering. It's about how you 
endure it.' 

 

*** 


 Jana! Janchen! 

 Take this hunchbacked monster away from me! I do not want to see it! 

 This is your daughter, just like mine. 

 Really? The children I have fathered are normal. 

 How dare you insinuate... to... 

 There were sorceresses in your elven family. You aborted your first pregnancy. It follows 
that your elf blood and womb are spoiled, woman. Why do you bring this monster into the 
world? 

 This unfortunate child... This was the will of the gods! This is your daughter, just like 
mine! What should I do? Strangle her? Tie off the umbilical cord? What do want from me? 
To go into the forest and leave her there? What do you want from me, by the gods? 

 Dad! Mama! 

 Go away, you monster. 

 How dare you? How dare you to hit the child? Stop? Where are you going? Where? To 
her, yes? To her! 

 Indeed, woman. I am a man, I can appease my desire where I want, when I want. This is 
my birthright. And you make me sick. You and the fruit of your correspondingly degenerate 
belly . Do not wait for dinner. I will not come back tonight. 

 Mama... 

 Why are you crying? 

 Why did you hit me and push me away? I was good... 

 Mama! Dear Mama! 

 

*** 

 
'Are you able to forgive?' 

'I have long since forgiven.' 

'After you avenged only too well.' 

'Yes.' 


'Are you sorry?' 

'No.' 

 

*** 

 

Pain, terrible pain that ate away her hands and fingers. 

'Yes, I'm guilty! Did you hear that? Confession and repentance? Did you hear how 
Yennefer of Vengerberg repented and humbled herself? No, I do not do this favour for you. I 
confess my sins and I expect the punishment. But I will not beg you for mercy!' 

The pain reached the limits of what can a person could endure. 

'You reminded me of the betrayed, the duped, the exploited, you reminded me of he who 
died by his own hand, by my hand... The fact that I once laid hands on myself? I obviously 
had reasons! And I have no regrets! And even if I could turn back time... I have no regrets.' 

The hawk perched on her shoulder. The Tower of the Swallow. The Tower of the 
Swallow. Hasten to the Tower of the Swallow. Daughter. 

 

*** 

 

The rooster Kambi crows. 

 

*** 

 

Ciri on a black mare, her gray hair blowing in the gallop. Blood flows and gushes from 
her face, a bright, vivid red. The black mare rises like a bird glides smoothly over the beams 
of the arch. Ciri sways in the saddle, but does not fall... 

Ciri in the middle of the night, amidst a wilderness of rock and sand, with raised hands, 
from her hands shoots out a glowing sphere... A unicorn, pawing in the gravel with his hoof... 
Many unicorns... Fire... Fire... 

Geralt on a bridge. In a fight. In a fire. The flames reflected on his sword blade. 

Fringilla Vigo, her green eyes wide open with lust, her dark, close-cropped head on an 
open book, on the frontispiece... You can see a fragment of the title: Reflections on the 


Inevitable Death of... 

Geralt's eyes reflected in the eyes of Fringilla. 

An abyss. Smoke. A flight of stairs that leads down. A flight of stairs that you have to 
take. Something ends. Tedd Deireádh comes, the time of the end... 

Darkness. Moisture. Intensely cold stone walls. The coldness of the iron on the wrists, the 
ankles. The pain that pulsates in tortured hands, tears at bruised fingers... 

Ciri holds her hand. A long, dark corridor, stone columns, statues perhaps... Darkness. A 
whisper as quiet as the whisper of the wind. 

Doors. An infinite number of doors with huge, heavy wings open silently in front of them. 
And in the end, in the impenetrable darkness, a door that does not open automatically. You 
may not open it. 

If you are afraid, turn back. 

That door mustn't be opened. You know that. 

I do. 

But you're still leading me there. If you are afraid, turn back. You still have time to turn 
back. It's still not too late. 

And you? 

For me it is too late. 

The rooster Kambi crows. 

Tedd Deireádh has come. 

The Aurora Borealis. 

Light. 


*** 

 
'Yennefer. Wake up.' 

She threw up her head. She looked at her hands. She had both. Salvation. 

'Sigrdrifa? I fell asleep...' 

'Come' 

'Where?' She whispered. 'Where to this time?' 


'What? I do not understand. You have to see. Something has happened... Something 
strange. None of us knows why or how this can be explained. But I can guess. The grace... 
You may have fallen to the grace of the goddess, Yennefer.' 

'What are you talking about, Sigrdrifa?' 

'Look.' 

She looked up. And sighed loudly. 

Brisingamen, the sacred jewel of Modron Freyja no longer hung on the neck of the 
goddess. It lay at her feet. 

 

*** 

 

'Do I hear you right?' Crach an Craite asked again. 'You are going to establish your 
magical workshop on Hindarsfjall? The priestesses gave the sacred diamond to you? You can 
use it in your infernal machine?' 

'Yes.' 

'Well, well, Yennefer, have you converted then? What happened there on the island?' 

'It doesn't matter. I'm returning to the temple, and that's final.' 

'And the financial resources for which you have asked? Will they still be needed?' 

'Probably, yes.' 

'Seneschal Guthlaf will fulfil your every relevant arrangement. But, Yennefer, give these 
orders quickly. Hurry. I have received new messages.' 

'Damn, I was afraid of that. Do they know where I am?' 

'No, they do not know yet. But I have been warned that you could show up on the 
Skellige Islands and was told to jail you immediately if you do. I am also supposed to take 
war prisoners and extort information from them, any crumb of information that concerns you. 
Or your stay in Nilfgaard and the provinces. Yennefer, hurry. If they track you down and find 
you here in Skellige, I would find myself in somewhat of a difficult situation.' 

'I am doing everything in my power to hurry. Also, to make sure that you will not be 
compromised. Do not worry.' 

Crach bared his teeth. 'I said, 'somewhat'. I'm not afraid of them. Neither the kings nor 
the magicians. They cannot hurt me, because they need me. And the assistance I have 
provided to you has been committed under my oath of allegiance. Yes, yes, you heard right. 


Formally, I'm still a vassal of the crown of Cintra. Cirilla and has a formal claim to that 
crown. As the representative of Cirilla, as her only guardian, you have a formal right to order 
me and to demand obedience and service.' 

'Casuistic quibble.' 

'Sure.' He laughed. 'I myself will call it such loudly, if after all it turns out that Emhyr var 
Emreis has forced the girl to marry him. Even if Ciri is ruled out by any legal manoeuvrings 
of the throne and someone else takes her place, such as that idiot Vissegerd. Then I will 
immediately renounce my oath of obedience and fealty.' 

'What if' – Yennefer narrowed her eyes -'it turns out that despite everything Ciri is 
dead?' 

'She's alive,' said Crach firmly. 'I know she is safe.' 

'How?' 

'You would not believe me.' 

'Try me.' 

'The blood of the queens of Cintra,' began Crach in a thoughtful tone, 'is strangely 
connected with the sea. If a woman of this blood dies, the sea falls into true madness. It is 
said that Ard Skellig mourns Riannon's daughters. Because the storms are so strong that the 
west waves permeate the island, waves attacking cracks and caves until they suddenly seep 
from the rock salt rivulets on the east side. And the whole island shakes. The common people 
say 'Ard Skellig sobs. Again someone has died. The blood of Riannon has died. The elder 
blood'.' 

Yennefer was silent. 

 

*** 

 

'This is no fairy tale,' continued Crach. 'I've seen it myself, with my own eyes. Three 
times. After the death of Adalia the Seer, after the death of Calanthe... And after the death 
Pavetta, the mother of Ciri.' 

'Pavetta' remarked Yennefer, 'was killed during a storm, so one can hardly say that...' 

'Pavetta' interrupted Crach, still thoughtfully, 'was not killed during a storm. The assault 
began after her death. The sea, as usual, responded to the death of someone of Cinterein 
blood. I have examined this matter for a sufficiently long time. And I am certain.' 

'How are you so certain?' 


'The ship that carried Pavetta and Duny disappeared over the Sedna-Depth. Theirs was 
not the first ship to have disappeared there. Surely you know about this.' 

'A fairy tale. Ships suffer disasters, which is a pretty natural thing...' 

'On the Skellige Islands,' he interrupted sharply and continued, 'we know enough of ships 
and seafaring to distinguish between natural and unnatural disasters. Ships go under above 
the Sedna-Depth unnaturally. And it is no coincidence. This also applies to the ship that 
Pavetta and Duny were travelling on. 

'I do not want to argue', the sorceress sighed. 'What does it even matter? After nearly 
fifteen years?' 

'For me, it plays a...' The Earl pressed his lips together. 'I'll clarify this matter. It is only a 
matter of time. I know I'll... Declarations will be found. I'm going to find explanations for all 
the mysteries. Including the time of the massacre of Cintra...' 

'What's that again about a mystery?' 

'When the Nilfgaardians stormed Cintra,' he murmured as he looked out the window, 
'Calanthe gave orders to secretly evacuate the girl from the city. The city was burning, but 
already the blacks were everywhere, the chances of breaking out of the siege were negligible. 
The Queen had been advised of the risk. Her advisors suggested Ciri might formally 
surrender to the Nilfgaardian army leaders and thus save her life and the Cinterein line of 
royalty. In the burning streets, she would inevitably and futilely die at the hands of the mobs 
of soldiers. But the lioness... Do you know what she is supposed to have said, according to 
witnesses?' 

'No.' 

''Better that the blood of the girl flows on the pavement of Cintra than it be desecrated.' 
How would it be desecrated?' 

'Through her marriage to Emperor Emhyr. The infamous Nilfgaardian. Earl, it's late. I 
start at dawn tomorrow morning... I will keep you informed and up to date on the progress 
made.' 

'I count on it. Good night, Yenna... Hmmm...' 

'What, Crach?' 

'I was wondering if you would like to, well...hmmm...as lust would have it...' 

'No, Earl. The past is the past and was not written into the register. Good night.' 

 

*** 

 


'Well, well.' Crach an Craite glanced at his visitor, his head tilted to one side. 'Triss 
Merigold in person. What an exceptionally pretty dress. And the lining... That's chinchilla is 
it not? I would ask, what leads you to the Skellige... If I did not already know. But I do 
know.' 

'Very good.' Triss smiled seductively, flipping her beautiful auburn hair. 'Very well, you 
know, Earl. That saves us the introduction and the introductory statements, so we can 
immediately get down to business.' 

'For what purpose?' Crach folded his arms across his chest and measured the sorceress 
with a cold stare. 'What statements do you reckon we should we start with? Who do you 
represent, Triss? In whose name are you here? King Foltest granted you employment as a 
reward for your services with a curse. But now he has driven you out of Temeria, even 
though you're guilty of nothing. So I've heard Philippa Eilhart has taken you under her wing. 
Philippa, who is currently working with Dijkstra and the de facto government of Redania. I 
see that you are thanking her for her asylum as well as possible. You don't even hesitate to 
take on the role of a spy who is to track down her former friend.' 

'You insult me, Earl.' 

'I humbly ask for forgiveness. If I have erred. Was I wrong?' 

They were silent for long, measuring each other with suspicious eyes. 

Finally, Triss waved, swore, and stamped her heel. 'Oh, damn! Let us stop leading each 
other around by the nose! What it does it matter now who serves whom, who is on whose 
side, and who remained loyal to whom for what reasons? Yennefer is no longer alive. It is 
still not known where Ciri is and in whose power... What is the sense of this secrecy? I did 
not come as a spy, Crach. I came out of my own accord, as a private person. Guided by 
concern for Ciri.' 

'Many are concerned for Ciri. The girl is very lucky.' Triss' eyes flashed. 'I would not 
mock it. Especially not in your place.' 

'Forgive me.' 

They fell silent, looking out the window at the red sun setting behind the wooded peaks of 
Spikeroog. 

'Triss Merigold.' 

'Yes, Earl.' 

'I would like to invite you to dinner. Ah yes, the cook wants to know whether all the 
sorceresses despise seafood.' 

Triss not disdain the seafood. On the contrary, she ate twice as much as she had planned, 
and now began to worry about her waist – to those twenty-two inches, of which she was so 


proud. She decided to promote the digestion with white wine, made with the famous 
Toussaint Est Est. She drank from a horn with Crach. 

'So Yennefer,' Triss continued the conversation, 'turned up here on the nineteenth day of 
August by spectacularly falling from the sky fell into a fishing net. You, a loyal vassal of 
Cintra, granted her asylum. You helped her build a megascope... And, of course, you know 
with whom she spoke and what about.' 

Crach an Craite took a swig from the horn and stifled a belch. 'I do not know.' He smiled 
slyly. 'Of course I know nothing. How should I, a poor and simple sailor, know anything 
about the activities of a powerful sorceress?' 

 
*** 

 

Sigrdrifa, the priestess of Modron Freyja, bowed her head low, as if the Earl's 
conversation dragged her down like a thousand-pound weight. 'She trusts me, Earl,' she 
murmured almost inaudibly. 'She has not asked that I promise not to disclose, but discretion 
was obviously implied. I really do not know if...' 

'Modron Sigrdrifa.' Crach an Craite interrupted seriously. 'What I ask for is not a 
betrayal. Like you, I support Yennefer. Like you, I hope that she finds and rescues Ciri. Ha, 
I've taken a Bloedgeas, a blood oath! But Yennefer worries me, I am guided by concern for 
her. She is an inordinately proud woman. Even if she had to undertake a very great risk, she 
would not be reduced to asking for assistance. Therefore, it may be necessary to rush to help 
her unbidden. To do this, I need information.' 

Sigrdrifa cleared her throat. Her face was expressionless. 

But as she spoke, her voice trembled a little. 'She has designed this machine... Actually 
that's not a machine, because there is no mechanism, only two mirrors, a black velvet curtain, 
the housing, two lenses, four lamps, and of course the Brisingamen... If she says a spell, the 
two lamps light and...' 

'Let's leave out the details. With whom does she communicate?' 

'She has spoken with several people. With sorcerers -... Earl, I have not heard much, but 
from what I have heard... There are not really any worthy people among them. None of them 
unselfishly wanted to help... They have asked for money... They have all asked for money...' 

'I know,' murmured Crach. 'I've seen the transfers she's made from my bank account. A 
pretty, oi, a beautiful chunk of money my oath has cost me! But money comes and goes. 
What I've spent on Yennefer and Ciri, I'm going to repeat on the Nilfgaardian provinces. But 
keep talking, Mother Sigrdrifa.' 

'Some' – the priestess bowed her head -'Yennefer blackmailed easily. She indicated that 


she was in possession of compromising information and that if cooperation was refused she 
would reveal it to the whole world... Earl... She is a wise and good woman, all in all... But she 
has no qualms at all. She is ruthless. And merciless.' 

'I know that all too well. On the other hand, on the details of extortion I want to know 
nothing, and I advise you to forget it as quickly as possible. This is dangerous knowledge. 
Outsiders should not play with such fire.' 

'I know, Earl. I owe obedience... And I think that your goals justify the means. No one 
else will learn anything from me. Neither the friend nor the friendly chatter of the enemy 
during torture.' 

'Well, Modron Sigrdrifa. Very good... What was discussed in the communications, do 
you remember?' 

'I didn't always understand everything, Earl. They used a jargon that as difficult to 
understand... There was often talk of a certain Vilgefortz...' 

'Of course.' Crach ground his teeth audibly. The priestess gave him a frightened look. 
'Much was also said of the elves and the elder speech', she said. 'And about magic portals. 
Even from the Sedna-Depth... But most of all, I think it was about towers.' 

'Towers?' 

'Yes. Two of them. The Tower of Gulls and the Tower of the Swallow.' 

 

*** 

 

'As I suspected,' said Triss. 'Yennefer found out about the first secret report of the 
Radcliffe Commission, which investigated the events on Thanedd. I do not know what news 
of the affair penetrated here, to Skellige... Have you heard of the portal in the Tower of 
Gulls? And the Radcliffe Commission?' 

Crach an Craite looked at the sorceress suspiciously. 'Here on the island,' – he sounded 
sour -'neither politics nor culture penetrate. We are isolated.' 

Triss thought it appropriate to note neither his voice nor his face. 'The Radcliffe 
Commission examined the tracks leading away from Thanedd teleportation portal. The 
teleportation portal of Tor Lara, located on the island, was disabled as long as the magical 
blocks of the Tower existed in any considerable degree. But as you without a doubt know, the 
Tower of Gulls exploded and collapsed, which made teleportation possible. Most of those 
who were involved in the events on Thanedd left the island through teleportation.' 

'Indeed.' The Earl smiled. 'For example, your flight directly into Brokilon. With a 
witcher on your back.' 


'There you go.' Triss looked into his eyes. 'Neither politics nor culture penetrate here, but 
rumours do. But let's leave that for now. We turn again to the work of the Radcliffe 
Commission. The Commission's aim was to determine exactly who teleported from Thanedd. 
They used a so-called Synopse, a spell that can reflect an image of past events. They also 
detected traces of teleportation and correlated them with the directions in which they lead, 
subsequently identifying the specific individuals who have opened a portal. We succeeded in 
virtually all cases. Except one. A teleportation trail that led nowhere. More specifically, into 
the sea. Into the Sedna-Depth.' 

'Someone,' the Earl realized immediately, 'teleported to a ship waiting at an agreed 
location. Strange that they teleported over such a long distance... And to such a notorious 
place. Well, if you have a knife to your throat...' 

'Exactly. The Commission also thinks so. And thus has formulated the following 
conclusion: Vilgefortz kidnapped Ciri, but had no other escape route, so he had to use the 
emergency exit – he teleported with the girl to the Sedna-Depth, to a Nilfgaardian ship 
waiting there. The Commission's conclusion is supported by the fact that Ciri was presented 
at the imperial court in Loc Grim on the tenth of July, just ten days after the events on 
Thanedd.' 

'Well.' The Earl's eyes narrowed. 'That explains a lot. Of course, under the assumption 
that the Commission did not err.' 

'Naturally.' The enchantress held his gaze, even allowing herself a wry smile. 'Loc Grim, 
of course, may have just been a look-alike, not the real Ciri. That would also explain a lot. It 
would explain another fact that the Radcliffe Commission has determined. Such a curious 
fact that it wasn't even mentioned in the first version of the report, as it was deemed too 
unlikely. It was, however, in the second, top-secret version of the report. As a hypothesis.' 

'I've been all ears for some time, Triss.' 

'The hypothesis of the Commission is thus: The teleport in the Tower of Gulls came into 
function. Someone walked through it, and the energy of this passage was so great that the 
teleport exploded and was destroyed. 

'Yennefer' Triss continued after a short silence, 'must have guessed what the Radcliffe 
Commission found out. What has been firmly kept in the secret report. There is a chance... a 
shadow of a chance... that Ciri was the one who travelled through the portal of Tor Lara. That 
she escaped Nilfgaard and Vilgefortz...' 

'Where is she then?' 

'I would also like to know that.' 

 

*** 


 

It was devilishly dark out. The clouds clustered together to hide the moon behind them, 
letting through almost no light. Compared to the exceedingly windy previous night, however, 
there was little wind and therefore it did not feel so cold. The little boat rocked on the 
rippling waves of water. It smelled like mud. And like rotting plants. And like ashes. 

Somewhere on the bank a beaver's tail hit the water, so that they both jumped. Ciri was 
sure that Vysogota had dozed off and that the beaver had woken him. 

'Tell me more,' she said, wiping her nose on a clean, not covered with mucus, part of her 
sleeve. 'Don't sleep. If you doze off and I fall asleep too, we will be carried by the current 
and will wake up in the sea! Tell me more of this teleporting!' 

'When you fled from Thanedd,' continued the hermit, 'you went through the portal at Tor 
Lara, the Tower of Gulls. However, Geoffrey Monck – who is the highest authority in 
matters of teleportation and the author of a book titled The Magic of the Elder Races, which 
is the magnum opus of knowledge of elven teleports – writes that the portal at Tor Lara leads 
to Tor Zireael, The Tower of the Swallow...' 

'The portal at Thanedd was broken,' interrupted Ciri. 'Maybe before it broke down it lead 
to a tower. But now it leads to the desert. It is called a chaotic portal. I've studied this.' 

'Imagine that, so have I,' snorted the old man. 'Much of which I remember. That's why I 
wonder about your story... about some parts of it. And concerning the teleportation...' 

'Can you speak more clearly?' 

'Can I Ciri? I can. But now it's high time to haul in the trap. There are bound to be eels in 
it. Ready?' 

'Ready.' Ciri spat on her hands and grabbed the boat hook. Vysogota reeled in the 
vanishing line from the water. 

'Out with it. Hee... eave! And into the boat! Catch them Ciri, hurry! Into the basket, 
otherwise they'll get away!' 

 

*** 

 

This was the second night they had gone out into the marshy tributary of the river and laid 
fish traps for the eels that migrated to the sea en masse. They returned to the hut well after 
midnight, wet, tired, and covered from top to bottom with slime. 

But all the same they did not go to sleep. The catch, intended for commercial exchange, 
had to be packed into boxes and sealed well – if the eels found even the smallest gap, there 


would not be a single one left in the morning. When they had finished working, Vysogota 
pulled out two or three of the fattest eels from the basket, cut them into pieces, rolled them in 
flour, and fried them in a huge pan. Then they ate and talked. 

'You know, Ciri, something still keeps me awake at night. I have not forgotten what we 
disagreed about, just after your recovery. About the date and the wound on your cheek that 
made the most accurate calendar imaginable. This wound could not be more than ten hours 
old, but you insisted it had been four days since you were wounded. Although I was sure this 
was a common mistake, I could not stop thinking about it. So I asked myself the question: 
Where did these four lost days go?' 

'And? Where have they been, in your opinion?' 

'I do not know.' 

'Wonderful, so...' 

The cat interrupted her sentence by pouncing on a thin, squeaking mouse. The cat 
casually bit its throat, tore out its entrails, and then began to eat with an appetite. Ciri looked 
on indifferently. 

'The portal at the Tower of Gulls,' resumed Vysogota 'leads to the Tower of the Swallow. 
The Tower of the Swallow, but...' 

The cat had eaten the mouse, leaving only the tail for dessert. 

'The portal from Tor Lara,' said Ciri as she yawned heartily, 'is broken and leads to the 
desert. That's what I've told you more than a hundred times.' 

'That doesn't matter for the moment. There is a connection between these two portals. The 
portal in Tor Lara is broken. But there is another portal in Tor Zireael. If you could get to the 
Tower of the Swallow, you could teleport yourself back to the island of Thanedd. You would 
be distanced from the danger that threatens you, out of the reach of your enemies.' 

'Ha! That would suit me. There is only one small problem. I have no idea where this 
Tower of the Swallow is.' 

'I, however, may be able to improve that situation. Ciri, do you know what earns a man 
his college degree?' 

'No. What?' 

'His ability to use sources.' 

 

*** 

 


'I knew it,' Vysogota said proudly, 'I've found it. I searched and searched and... Oh, 
crap...' 

The stack of heavy books slipped from his fingers and the incunabula clattered to the 
ground. The pages fell from the crumbling bindings and scattered around randomly. 

'What have you found?' Ciri knelt down beside him, helping him collect the scattered 
pages. 

'The Tower of the Swallow!' The hermit shooed away the cat, who had seated himself on 
one of the pages. 'Tor Zireael. Help me.' 

'This is dusty! The sticks! Vysogota? What is this? Here, in this picture? This man who 
hangs from a tree?' 

'That?' Vysogota looked at the loose page. 'A scene from the legend of Hemdall. The 
hero Hemdall hung for nine days and nine nights on the world-ash tree to gain knowledge and 
power through sacrifice and pain.' 

Ciri rubbed her forehead. 'I have dreamed such a thing a few times before. A man 
hanging from a tree...' 

'The engraving has... since fallen out of this book. If you want, you can read it later. But 
the most important thing now... alas, I finally have it. Walks on Trails and Places of Magic by 
Buyvid Backhuysen, a book known for its somewhat apocryphal...' 

'That means fraudulent?' 

'More or less. But there are always some people that know how to appreciate a book... So, 
listen... Damn, it is dark in here...' 

'It's bright enough, you're simply going blind in your old age,' Ciri said with careless 
cruelty of youth. 'Give it to me, I'll read it myself. Where should I start?' 

'Here' He pointed his bony finger. 'Read it aloud.' 

 

*** 

 

'This Buyvid wrote strangely. Assengard was probably something like a palace if I'm not 
mistaken. But what is this country: Hundredlakes? I've never heard of it before. And what is 
Trifolium?' 

'Clover. And I'll tell you of the Hundredlakes of Assengard after you've finished reading.' 

 


*** 

 

'And no sooner had the elf Avallac'h spoken these words, than a little black bird flew 
quickly out from under the waters of the lake, in whose depths it had found refuge throughout 
the entire winter. The swallow, as learned men know well, does not fly away in autumn and 
return in the spring like the other birds, but gathers its small claws into large clusters and 
sinks to the bottom of the water, so that it survives there the entire winter period until spring 
comes and they fly out of the water. Because of this, the swallow is not only a symbol of 
spring and hope, but also an example of immaculate purity, because it never lands on the 
ground and has no contact with earthly dirt and filth. 

 But let us return to our lake: The circling bird must have fancied us, because he scattered 
the mist with his little wings and a wondrous, magical tower emerged unexpectedly out of the 
mist. We all sighed as one in amazement, because this tower, whose foundation was woven 
from mist and fog, was crowned at the top by a sparkling glow, like a magical aurora 
borealis. Verily, the tower had to be built with powerful magical arts, for it was 
incomprehensible to human intellect. 

 The elf Avallac'h was aware of our admiration and said, 'That is Tor Zireael, the Tower 
of the Swallow. This is the Crossroads of the Worlds and the Gates of Time. Rejoice, men, 
that your eyes have seen this sight, because not all can see it and not at all times.' 

 When asked, however, if we could approach and behold the magnificent tower from 
nearer, Avallac'h laughed. 'Tor Zireael,' he said, 'is a but a dream for you, you do not touch 
a dream. And that is good,' he added, 'because the tower serves only the knowledgeable and 
chosen few, for the Gate of Time is the door to hope and rebirth. But for the common people 
it is the gateway to nightmares.' He had hardly uttered these words when the fog rose up 
again and our eyes failed to behold that magical sight...' 

 

*** 

 

'The landscape of Hundredlakes', Vysogota said, 'is now Mil Trachta. It is very broad, 
sliced through by the Yelena River, which cuts through lakes in the northern part of Metinna, 
near the border of Nazair and Mag Turga. Buyvid Backhuysen writes that they travelled 
south to the lake from Assengard... Today Assengard is no more, only its ruins remain and 
the closest town is Neunreuth. Buyvid counted sixteen leagues from Assengard. Many 
different lengths of measurement were used then, but if we use the most common, we can 
deduce that sixteen of their leagues is about fifty of our miles. We are in Pereplut, about three 
hundred and fifty miles to the south of Assengard. In other words Ciri, you are only separated 
from the Tower of the Swallow by three hundred miles, give or take. On your Kelpie it would 
likely only take you six weeks to get there. In the spring, of course. Not now, because frost is 


possible in a day or two.' 

'Assengard, from what I've read,' Ciri murmured, pulling her nose thoughtfully, 'is only 
ruins of the past now. And I have seen the ruins of the elven city of Shaerrawedd in Kaedwen 
with my own eyes. I've been there. People have looted and taken everything, leaving only the 
bare stones behind. I bet that only the stones of your Tower of the Swallow remain, and only 
the larger ones at that – the smaller ones have surely been stolen. If there was a portal there...' 

'Tor Zireael was magical. It was not visible to all. And portals are never to be seen.' 

'True,' she admitted, and became thoughtful. 'The portal on Thanedd was certainly not 
visible. It appeared suddenly on a bare wall... incidentally, just in time, because the magician 
who was pursuing me was closing in... I could hear him... and then, as if on command, the 
portal appeared.' 

'I'm sure,' Vysogota said quietly, 'if you went to Tor Zireael, the portal there would 
reveal itself to you as well. Even if it were in ruins, surrounded by bare stones, I'm sure you 
could find and activate it. And it would, I'm sure, obey your command. Because Ciri, I think 
you are the chosen one.' 

 

*** 

 

'Your hair, Triss, is like fire in the candlelight. And your eyes are like Lapis Lazuli. Your 
lips are like coral...' 

'Stop it, Crach. Are you drunk or what? Pour me some wine. And talk.' 

'About what?' 

'Don't be stupid! Of how Yennefer decided to go to the Sedna-Depth.' 

 

*** 

 

'How do you progress? Talk, Yennefer.' 

'First you will answer me one question: Who are those two women I meet every time I 
come to you? The ones that look at me every time with looks that are usually reserved for a 
piece of cat shit lying on the sofa? Who are they?' 

'Are you after their formal legal status or fact?' 

'The latter.' 


'They are my wives.' 

'I understand. Perhaps you should explain to them, when the opportunity arises, that the 
past is the past and was not written into the register.' 

'I have. But women are women. Never mind. Tell me, Yennefer. I'm interested in the 
progress of your work.' 

The sorceress bit her lips. 'Unfortunately, the progress is minimal. And time is running 
out.' 

'It is running out.' He nodded. 'And always brings new sensations. I have received news 
from the continent that will interest you. It comes from Corps of Vissegerd. Hopefully you 
know who Vissegerd is?' 

'A general from Cintra?' 

'A marshal. More precisely, chamberlain. He leads a part of the Temerian Army 
consisting of Cinterein emigrants and volunteers. There are more than enough volunteers 
from the islands to give pass messages first-hand.' 

'And what are they?' 

'You came here to Skellige on the nineteenth day of August, two days after full moon. On 
the same day, i.e. on the nineteenth, the Corps of Vissegerd, in the course of fighting on the 
River Ina, took in a group of refugees, among them Geralt and a troubadour that is known to 
him...' 

'Dandelion?' 

'Exactly. Vissegerd accused both of espionage, placed them under arrest, and wanted to 
put them to death, but the two prisoners escaped and rushed towards the Nilfgaardians that 
Vissegerd had alleged they were plotting with.' 

'Nonsense.' 

'I think so too. But I'm feeling that the witcher, contrary to what you think, is perhaps 
pursuing some cunning plan. That he is going to save Ciri from the Nilfgaardian creeps...' 

'Ciri is not in Nilfgaard. And Geralt does not pursue any plan. Planning is not one of his 
strong points. Never mind. What is important is that it is the twenty-sixth day of September 
and I still know too little. Not enough to do something... Unless...' 

She trailed off, looking out the window, and played with the black velvet ribbon attached 
to the star of obsidian. 

'Unless?' 

'Instead of me laughing at Geralt, I could try his method.' 


'I do not understand.' 

'I could try to sacrifice myself. Sacrifice will pay off, yes, show good character... And it is 
in the shape of the grace of a goddess. She loves and appreciates those who sacrifice and 
suffer for a cause.' 

He frowned. 'I still do not understand. But I don't like what you are saying, Yennefer.' 

'I know. Me neither. But I've already gone too far... Perhaps the lion should hear the 
lamb's complaint...' 

 

*** 

 

'I was afraid of that,' whispered Triss. 'That's exactly what I was afraid of.' 

'I mean, I understood it at that time.' Crach an Craite's jaw muscles began to tense. 
'Yennefer knew that someone had eavesdropped on the conversations she had through her 
infernal machine. Or that one of the interlocutors was treacherously telling...' 

'Or both.' 

'She knew it.' Crach gritted his teeth. 'But she still continued what she started. Perhaps 
because she needed a decoy? Using herself as the bait? Did she pretend to know more than 
she did to provoke the enemy? And so she went to the Sedna-Depth...' 

'As a challenge. As a provocation. She was taking a terrible risk, Crach.' 

'I know. She did not want any of us to run the risk... only volunteers. So she asked for two 
dragon boats...' 

 

*** 

 

'I have the two ships you asked for. The 'Alcyone' and the 'Tamara'. And the crew. The 
'Alcyone' is captained by Guthlaf, son of Sven, because he asked for the honour. You must 
have impressed him Yennefer. 

The 'Tamara' will be captained by Asa Thjazi, a captain in whom I have absolute 
confidence. Oh, I almost forgot. My son will be on the crew of 'Tamara', Hjalmar-SplitLip.' 

'Your son? How old is he?' 

'Nineteen.' 


'You started early.' 

'Look who's talking. Hjalmar has personal reasons to ask to be included in the crew. I 
could not refuse him.' 

'Personal reasons?' 

'Do you really not know the story?' 

'No. Tell me.' 

Crach an Craite emptied his drinking horn and smiled, reflecting on his memoirs. 

'The children of Ard Skellig,' he began, 'love ice skating in the winter, they can hardly 
wait for the first frost to come. They are always the first to walk on the barely frozen lakes, 
on sheets of ice so thin that they could not support an adult. Of course, the races are the best. 
Running and gaining momentum like there's no tomorrow, from one shore to another. The 
boys, however, also organize competitions that are called 'Salmon Jumps'. The idea is to 
jump over the crags that rise from the ice like shark's teeth. Just like a salmon when it jumps 
up the steps of a waterfall. You look for a suitably long line of stones, take off , and... Ha, I'm 
jumping around like a snot nosed brat myself...' 

Crach an Craite became thoughtful and smiled a little. 

'Naturally,' he continued, 'whoever skips the longest series of rocks wins and afterwards 
flaunts himself like a peacock. At that time, Yennefer, the winner is often bestowed Yours 
Truly as their humble servant for a day, oho. That is mainly what interested my son, Hjalmar. 
He leapt over rocks that none of the other boys dared jump. And this led to a highly raised 
nose – he challenged anyone to try to defeat him. And his challenge was accepted. By Ciri, 
Pavetta's daughter from Cintra. She was not even one of the islanders, although she was 
allowed because she had spent more time here than in Cintra.' 

'Even after Pavetta's accident? I thought Calanthe had forbidden her to stay here?' 

'You know about that?' He shot her a quick glance. 'Then you know a lot Yennefer. A 
lot. Calanthe's anger and bans lasted no longer than six months, and then Ciri once again 
started to spend summers and winters here... and to skate. She was quick as hell, but that she 
would compete with the other boys in 'Salmon Jumps'? And challenge Hjalmar? 
Inconceivable!' 

'She jumped', guessed the sorceress. 

'Yes. This small Cinterein could jump like a half-devil. A real lion cub from the blood of 
the lion. And Hjalmar, in order to not be made a mockery of, had to risk taking a leap over an 
even longer series of rocks. He risked it. He broke his leg, his arm, four ribs, and smashed his 
face. The scar will remain with him until death. Hjalmar-SplitLip! And his famous fiancée. 
Hehe!' 


'Fiancée?' 

'You didn't know that either? How can you know so much about some things and nothing 
at all about others? She came to visit him, as he lay recovering from the famous leap. She 
read to him, talked with him, held hands with him... And if someone entered the room, they 
both turned as red as radishes. Well, finally Hjalmar told me that they had gotten engaged. I 
nearly had a stroke. I told the brat I'd arrange an engagement for him, but with a bullwhip! 
And I was a bit worried because I'd noticed that the lion cub had hot blood. Even when 
everything went smoothly, she was a daredevil, not to mention a little crazy... Fortunately, 
Hjalmar was stuck in there for a while, so they couldn't run off and do anything stupid...' 

'How old were they then?' 

'He was fifteen, she nearly twelve.' 

'Your fears might have been exaggerated a little.' 

'Perhaps. But Calanthe, who I had to tell all of it to, did not take the matter lightly. I know 
she had wedding plans for Ciri, to join her with young Tancred Thyssen of Kovir or perhaps 
to the Redanian prince, Radovid, I don't know exactly. But rumours can hurt marriage plans, 
even rumours about innocent kissing or semi-innocent kissing... Calanthe immediately 
brought Ciri back to Cintra. The girl bucked and howled snot and water, but to no avail. The 
Lioness of Cintra put her foot down. For the following two days, Hjalmar lay with his face to 
the wall and would answer no one. Once he was healthy again, he tried to steal a skiff and 
sail off to Cintra alone. He had to be calmed down somewhat by my belt. But then...' 

Crach an Craite stopped to think. 

'Then came the summer, and then autumn, and soon enough the power of Nilfgaard rolled 
forth against Cintra, over the Marnadal-Stairs, over the south wall. Hjalmar found a different 
opportunity to become a man. He boldly defied the blacks at Marnadal, then in Cintra, and 
then in Sodden. Even later, when the dragon boats sailed to the Nilfgaardian coast, Hjalmar 
had a sword in his hand, retaliating for his almost-fiancée, who he thought to be dead at the 
time. I did not think so, since the phenomena I told you of earlier had not occurred... Well, 
now that Hjalmar has learned of a possible rescue expedition, he has volunteered.' 

'Thank you for the story, Crach. I feel rejuvenated after listening to it. It made me... forget 
my worries.' 

'When will you set out, Yennefer?' 

'In the coming days. Possibly even tomorrow. I have one last telecommunication I need to 
conduct.' 

 

*** 


 

Crach an Craite's eyes were like a hawk's. They drilled deep inside her... 

'By chance, do you happen to know, Triss Merigold, who Yennefer conducted her last 
call with before she took her infernal machine apart? On the night of the twenty-seventh to 
the twenty-eighth of August? With whom? And about what?' 

Triss shut her eyelashes to hide from his eyes. 

 

*** 

 

The brilliant beam of light, broken by the diamond, flashed on the surface of the mirror. 
Yennefer stretched out both hands and began chanting a spell. The blindingly bright light 
reflected and concentrated into a fog. Soon a picture began to emerge. The image of a room 
whose walls were covered with colourful tapestries. 

A movement at the window. And a troubled voice. 'Who? Who's there?' 

'I'm here, Triss.' 

'Yennefer! That you? Gods! How did... Where are you?' 

'It does not matter where I am. Do not block the image, because the picture varies. And 
take away that candle, its blinding.' 

'Right. Of course.' 

Although it was late at night, Triss Merigold was wearing neither lingerie nor her work 
clothes. She wore a dress for going out. As usual, high collared and closed. 

'Can we talk freely?' 

'Of course.' 

'You're alone?' 

'Yes.' 

'You're lying.' 

'Yennefer...' 

'You are deceiving me, brat. I know your face; I know you too well. It's the same look 
you had when you started sleeping with Geralt behind my back. Back then you put on the 
same sheepish, innocent mask that I see on your face now. And it means the same thing now 
that it meant back then!' 


Triss was red. Philippa Eilhart appeared in the window next to her, dressed in a dark blue 
men's jerkin. 'Bravo,' she said. 'As usual, quick. As usual, perceptive. As usual, hard to 
grasp and understand. I am glad to see you in health, Yennefer. I am happy that your crazy 
teleportation from Montecalvo did not end in tragedy.' 

'Let's assume that you really are happy.' Yennefer pouted. 'Although that is a very bold 
assumption. But never mind that, who betrayed me?' 

Philippa shrugged her shoulders. 'Does it matter? For four days now you've been in 
contact with traitors. To such as them, venality and treachery are second nature. And to those 
that you have blackmailed to betrayal. One of them has betrayed you. The normal course of 
events. Don't tell me you didn't expect it.' 

'Of course I expected it,' snapped Yennefer. 'The best proof of that is that I've contacted 
you. I did not have to.' 

'You did not have to. This means that you have an agenda.' 

'Bravo. As usual, quick. As usual, perceptive. I have contacted you to assure you that the 
secret of your Lodge is safe with me. I will not tell on you.' 

Philippa stared at her from under lowered eyelids. 'If you believe,' she said finally, 'that 
you've won peace, time, or security with this declaration, then you've miscalculated. Make no 
mistake about it, Yennefer. When you fled from Montecalvo, you made your decision. You 
chose to stand on a different side of the barricade. If you are not with the Lodge, you are 
against the Lodge. Now you're trying to forestall us from finding Ciri, and the motives that 
guide you are opposed to ours. You act against us. You do not want to allow us to use Ciri for 
our political purposes. You should know that we will also do everything in our power to 
make sure that you cannot use the girl for your sentimental purposes.' 

'So its war?' 

'Competition.' Philippa smiled toxically. 'Competition only, Yennefer.' 

'Decent and honourable?' 

'You must be joking.' 

'Obviously. Though on at least one specific issue, I would like have an honest and 
genuine conversation. And incidentally it involves a favour to me.' 

'Speak.' 

'Over the next few days, maybe even tomorrow, events will occur whose consequences I 
cannot foresee. It may happen that our competition and rivalry suddenly has no meaning. For 
the simple reason that one of the competitors will not be there anymore.' 

Philippa Eilhart narrowed her blue shaded eyes. 'I understand.' 


'Ensure that I posthumously gain back my reputation and good name. I will no longer be 
held for a traitor or an accomplice of Vilgefortz. I ask this of the Lodge. I ask this of you 
personally.' 

Philippa was silent for a moment. 

'I deny your request,' she said finally. 'I'm sorry, but your exoneration is not in the 
interest of the Lodge. If you die, you die a traitor. You'll be a traitor and criminal to Ciri, 
because then it will be easier to manipulate the girl.' 

'Before you do something that could be fatal,' Triss said suddenly, 'leave something 
behind for us...' 

'A will?' 

'Something that allows us to... continue. To find Ciri. Because we are primarily 
concerned for her health! For her life! Yennefer, Dijkstra has found some traces of... some 
traces of certain activities have been found. If Vilgefortz does have Ciri, then the girl faces a 
horrible death.' 

'Be quiet, Triss,' Philippa Eilhart hissed sharply. 'We are not trading or bargaining.' 

'I will leave you the information', Yennefer said slowly. 'I'll leave you the information on 
what I've found and what I plan. I'll leave a trail you can follow to her. But not in vain. If you 
will not facilitate my exoneration in the eyes of the world, then to hell with you and with the 
world. But at least grant me exoneration in the eyes of the witcher.' 

'No,' Philippa denied the request almost instantly. 'That is also not in the interest of the 
Lodge. You will also remain a traitor and a mercenary sorceress to your witcher. It is not in 
the interest of the Lodge for him to furiously attempt to avenge you. If he despises you, he 
will not attempt to take revenge. By the way, he's probably already dead or will die any day 
now.' 

'The information' Yennefer said dully, 'for his life. Save him, Philippa.' 

'No, Yennefer.' 

'Because it's not in the interest of the Lodge.' A purple fire kindled in the sorceress' eyes. 
'Did you hear that Triss? There, you have your Lodge. You see their true colours, their true 
interests. And what do you think of them? You were a mentor to the girl, almost – as you put 
it – a big sister. And Geralt...' 

'Do not attack Triss' relationships, Yennefer.' Philippa retaliated with her own fire in her 
eyes. 'We will find and rescue the girl without your help. And if you succeed, that's fine, a 
thousand thanks, because you will have saved us the trouble. You tear the girl out of the 
hands of Vilgefortz and we will be happy. And Geralt? Who cares about Geralt?' 

'Did you hear that, Triss?' 


'Forgive me,' said Triss Merigold dully. 'Forgive me, Yennefer.' 

'Oh no, Triss. Never.' 

 

*** 

 

Triss stared at the ground. Crach an Craite's eyes were like a hawk's. 

'The day after this last mysterious communication,' the Earl of the Skellige Islands said 
slowly,' – of which you, Triss Merigold, know nothing about of course – Yennefer left the 
island, setting a course for the Sedna-Depth. When I asked her why she was going there, she 
looked into my eyes and replied that she had to check whether the natural disasters there were 
any different from the unnatural. She travelled with two dragon boats, the 'Tamara' and the 
'Alcyone', and with a crew composed entirely of volunteers. This was the twenty-eighth of 
August, two weeks ago. I have not seen her since.' 

'When did you hear...' 

'Five days later', he interrupted sharply. 'Three days after the September moon.' 

Captain Asa Thjazi, who sat in front of the Earl, was restless. He licked his lips and slid 
back and forth on the bench, fingers kneaded so that his knuckles cracked. The red sun, 
which had finally emerged from the low hanging clouds in the sky, slowly started to sink 
behind Spikeroog. 'Speak, Asa,' Crach an Craite ordered. 

Asa Thjazi coughed violently. 'We travelled fast,' he reported, 'the wind was favourable 
and we made a good twelve knots. On the evening of the twenty-ninth, we saw the lights of 
the Peixe de Mar lighthouse. We shot a little to the west, so as to not encounter any 
Nilfgaardians... And at dawn on the day prior to the September moon, we came to area 
known as the Sedna-Depth. The sorceress cried for Guthlaf and me to...' 

 

*** 

 

'I need volunteers' Yennefer said. 'Only volunteers. No more than necessary to control a 
dragon boat for a short time. I do not know how many people this requires, I am not familiar 
with it. But I ask for not one more man than absolutely necessary on the 'Alcyone'. And I 
repeat – only volunteers. What I plan is... very risky. Riskier than a sea-battle.' 

'I understand.' The old seneschal nodded. 'And I volunteer first. I, Guthlaf, son of Sven, 
ask for this honour, my lady.' 

Yennefer looked long into his eyes. 'Good,' she said. 'But I am the one who is honoured.' 


 

*** 

 

'I also volunteered,' said Asa Thjazi. 'But Guthlaf would not allow it. Someone, he said, 
must stay behind to command the 'Tamara'. Finally, fifteen had volunteered. Including 
Hjalmar, Earl.' 

Crach an Craite raised his eyebrows. 

 

*** 

 

'How many do we need Guthlaf?' Repeated the sorceress. 'How many are essential? 
Please calculate this accurately.' 

The steward was silent for a while, calculating. 

'We can get by with eight,' he said. 'If it is only for a short time... But we have many 
volunteers here, so we do not need to be so...' 

'Pick eight of these fifteen,' she interrupted him sharply. 'Do it yourself. And tell them 
that they are to go aboard the 'Alcyone'. Everyone else will remain on the 'Tamara'. Oh yes, 
and I will pick one that remains. Hjalmar!' 

'No, lady! You cannot do this to me! I volunteered and I will stand by your side! I want 
to...' 

'Shut up! You will stay on the 'Tamara'! That's an order! One more word and I'll have 
you tied to the mast!' 

 

*** 

 

'Continue, Asa.' 

'The sorceress, Guthlaf, and those eight volunteers went aboard the 'Alcyone' and went to 
the Depth. We stayed behind in the 'Tamara' as ordered, but the distance was not too great. 
However, the weather, which we had hitherto been favourable, suddenly became something 
devilish. Yes, devilish is the right word for it, because there was an evil force at work, Earl... 
may you careen me if I lie...' 

'Continue.' 


'Where the 'Tamara' was, it was quiet. Although the wind began to act a little 
mischievous so that clouds moved over the sky until the day was almost as dark as night. But 
where the 'Alcyone' was, all hell broke loose. Pure hell...' 

 

*** 

 

The sails of the 'Alcyone' suddenly began to beat so violently that they could be heard 
from the 'Tamara', despite the distance between the two ships. The sky was black and the 
clouds had clustered together. The sea, which appeared totally calm near the 'Tamara', 
swelled up and threw breakers over the side of the 'Alcyone'. Suddenly someone cried out, 
then someone else joined in, and immediately after everyone was shouting. 

Under a black cloud with a tapering cone, the 'Alcyone' danced on the waves like a cork – 
turning, whirling, jumping, and diving quickly into the waves with its bow, or sometimes its 
stern. There were moments when the dragon boat was almost completely hidden from sight. 
There were moments when the only thing that could be seen was the striped sail. 

'It's magic!' Someone shouted behind Asa's back. 'It's the devil's magic!' 

The vortex left the 'Alcyone' spinning faster and faster. The shields on the dragon boat's 
sidewalls were torn off from by centrifugal force and whizzed through the air like discuses, 
shooting to the left and right of the broken rudder. 

'Reef the sails,' cried Asa Thjazi. 'Man the helm! We're moving! We need to help!' 

But it was too late. 

The black sky above the 'Alcyone' suddenly exploded with jagged lightning, clasping the 
ship like the tentacles of a jellyfish. The fantastic shapes of the aggregated clouds twisted into 
a monstrous funnel. The dragon boat spun around with uncanny speed. The mast broke like a 
matchstick and the torn sails hovered over the breakers like a giant albatross. 

'Row, men!' 

He could barely hear his own roar over the roar of the elements, but they all heard the cry 
of the people on the 'Alcyone'. It was such an eerie scream that it made their hair stand on 
end. Them... ancient mariners, bloody zealots, and sailors who had seen and heard so much. 

They let go of the oars, aware of their powerlessness. They were stunned, they even 
stopped shouting. 

Still turning, the 'Alcyone' rose slowly over the waves. It rose higher and higher. They 
saw the keel dripping water, covered with barnacles and seaweed. Then they saw a black 
shape, a silhouette falling into the waves. Then another. And then a third. 


'They're jumping,' cried Asa Thjazi. 'Row, men, do not fade! Row like there's no 
tomorrow! We ride to the rescue!' 

The 'Alcyone' was already a hundred yards above the ocean's surface, where the water 
was bubbling as if it were boiling. She still whirled around – a huge, dripping spindle, 
embraced by fiery flashes of forked lightening and pulled by an invisible force into the 
aggregated clouds. 

Suddenly, a deafening explosion ripped the air. Although she was driven by fifteen pairs 
of oars, the 'Tamara' suddenly jumped up and was flung backwards like a battering ram. Asa 
Thjazi felt the deck shift beneath his feet. He fell, hitting his temple on the railing. 

He could not even stand up, he had to be lifted. He was stunned. He turned and shook his 
head, stammering incoherently. He heard the shouts of the crew from afar. He stumbled to the 
side, swaying like a drunk, and clutched the railing. 

The wind had died down and the waves had calmed. But the sky was still full of 
aggregated black clouds. 

There was no trace was no trace of the 'Alcyone' to be seen. 

 

*** 

 

'There was no trace to be seen, Earl. Well, bits of the rigging, some scraps... Nothing 
more.' 

Asa Thjazi broke off the story and watched the sun as it sank behind the wooded peaks of 
Spikeroog. Crach an Craite, lost in thought, did not urge him on. 

'You never know,' Asa Thjazi continued at last, 'how many were able to jump off the 
'Alcyone' before that vicious cloud passed. But no matter how many jumped, no one 
survived. And although we spared both time and effort, we were only able to recover two 
bodies. Two bodies that floated in the water. Only two.' 

'The sorceress,' the Earl said in a changed voice, 'was not among them?' 

'No.' 

 Crach an Craite was silent for a long time. The sun disappeared behind Spikeroog. 

'Old Guthlaf, son of Sven, is gone,' Asa Thjazi continued. 'Most likely the crabs at the 
bottom of Sedna-Depth have already gnawed him to the last bone... The sorceress 
disappeared altogether... Earl, people have started to talk... That it was all their fault. And that 
the punishment fit the crime...' 

'Fools talk!' 


'She disappeared,' muttered Asa 'in the Sedna-Depth. At the same place as Pavetta and 
Duny... What a coincidence...' 

'That is no coincidence,' said Crach an Craite firmly. 'Neither this time nor the time 
before were coincidences.' 

 

*** 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


It is essential that the unfortunate suffer. His pain and humiliation resulting from the laws 
of nature, which require suffering as well him who his suffering is caused by. This truth must 
override any remorse in the soul of a tyrant or villain. He does not have to restrain, he must 
commit boldly all the acts that are born of his imagination, because it is the voice of nature 
that suggests it to him. 

It is the secret inspiration of nature that leads us to evil, then evil is apparently naturally 
essential. 

 

Donatien Alphonse Francois de Sade 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


