Chapter Ten 

 

 

The sound of a door creaking open and then closing woke the youngest of the Scarra 
sisters from slumber. The eldest of the sisters sat at the table and was busy scraping porridge 
from the bottom of a tin bowl. 

'How did it go in court, Kenna?' 

Joanna Selbourne, call Kenna, said nothing. She sat on the bed, elbows on knees and her 
forehead in her hands. 

The young Scarra yawned, and belched loudly. On the opposite bed, Kohout vaguely 
muttered something and turned away. He was angry at Kenna, with the sisters and the whole 
world. 

In ordinary prisons, prisoners were still traditionally divided by gender. The military 
fortresses were different. The Emperor Fergus var Emreis, in a decree confirming the equal 
rights of women in the imperial army, ordered that if emancipated, for emancipation, equality 
should be the same everywhere and in every respect, without exception, or special privileged 
for any of the sexes. Since that time, in the fortresses and citadels, prisoners served their 
sentences in coeducational cells. 

'So what?' the elder Scarra reiterated her earlier question. 'Will they release you?' 

'Justice,' said Kenna bitterly with her head still in her hands. 'I'll be lucky if I'm not 
hanged. Damn! I testified the whole truth and hid nothing, well, almost nothing. And that 
bastard started making me look insane, he announced that I was an unreliable person and a 
criminal element, and in the end accused me of involvement in the conspiracy, which aimed 
to overthrow...' 

'Overthrow,' said the older Scarra, pretending to understand her, shook her head. 'If it is 
about the overthrow, you're fucked, Kenna.' 

'As if I didn't know.' 

Scarra the Younger stretched and yawned again, widely and loudly like a leopard and 
jumped off the top bunk, energetically kicked a stool obstructing her way, and spat on the 
floor beside the stool. Kohout grunted, but did not dare more. 

Kohout was deadly angry with Kenna. But he was afraid of the sisters. 

When Kenna was three days ago assigned to this cell, it quickly became apparent that 
Kohout had his own opinions about the emancipation and equality of women. In the middle 
of the night he threw a blanket over the top of Kenna's body with the intention of using the 


lower part, which surely would have succeeded had it not been for the fact that he had found 
a psionic. Kenna got into his brain in such a way that Kohout howled like a werewolf and 
crawled around the cell like he had been bitten by a tarantula. Kenna, out of pure revenge, 
telepathically forced him to get on all fours and hit his head on the metal door of the cell. 
When alarmed by the terrible noise, the guards opened the door and gave Kohout a beating, 
receiving five blows from a club and as many kicks. In summary, Kohout did not get the 
night of pleasure he was expecting. And he became angry with Kenna. He did not even dare 
think of revenge, because the next day they were put in a cell with the Scarra sisters. So the 
fair sex was the majority and to top it off, it soon became clear that the view of the sisters on 
gender were close to Kohout's, except the exact opposite when it came to the roles assigned 
to genders. Scarra the Younger looked with a predatory loo into his eyes and utter clear, 
unmistakable comments, the older sister just laughed and rubbed her hands together happily. 
The result was that Kohout slept with a wooden stool, which, if necessary he would use to 
defend his honour. In the case of an actual threat his chances were slim – the two sisters had 
servers in the regular army and were veterans of many battles. They would not surrender to a 
stood if they wanted to rape and violate him, even if the man was armed with an axe. Kenna 
was certain that the sisters were only joking. Well, almost certain. 

The Scarra sisters were in jail for having beaten an officer, while in Kohout's case he was 
in pending an investigation related to a scam for stealing the spoils of war that was already 
famous and reaching higher circles. 

'You're fucked, Kenna,' the old Scarra repeated. 'You're stuck in deep shit. Or rather you 
have been dipped. Because you don't realise this is a political game!' 

'Bah!' 

Scarra looked at her, not really knowing how to read the monosyllabic statement. Kenna 
looked away. 

I'm not going to tell you that I was silent before the judges, she thought. That I knew what 
game I was getting entangled in. Neither of when or how I learned. 

'You bit off more than you could swallow,' the significantly younger Scarra said wisely, 
who according to Kenna had no idea what was going on here. 

'What happened with the princess of Cintra?' the older Scarra did not give up. 'You 
caught her, right?' 

'Caught. If you can say that... What's the date today?' 

'Twenty-second of September. Tomorrow is the equinox.' 

'Ha. What a coincidence. Tomorrow it will be exactly one year since those events... a 
year...' 

Kenna lay on the bed, hands clasped behind her neck. The sisters were silent, hoping that 
this was an introduction to a story. 


Not at all, sisters, Kenna thought, looking at the filth written and drawn on the boards of 
the bunk above her. There will be no story. And not because Kohout would sell me out to the 
fucking cops or another witness for the crown. I just do not want to talk about it. I don't want 
to remember. 

What happened a year ago... after Bonhart escaped us in Claremont. 

We arrived there two days too late, she remembered, and the trail had already cooled. 
Nobody knew where the bounty hunter had gone. No one except the merchant Houvenaghel, I 
mean. But Houvenaghel would not talk to us or Skellen and would not even let us enter his 
house and sent a servant that told us he did not have time to grant an audience. The Owl 
sulked and bridled, but what could I do? It was Ebbing and I had no jurisdiction. And 
otherwise – on our own – we could not go after Houvenaghel, because he had a private army 
in Claremont and we could not start a war... 

Boreas Mun tracked, Dacre Silifant and Ola Harsheim attempted to bribe, Til Echrade 
tried elven magic and I perceived thoughts and listened, but this did not amount to much. We 
learned that Bonhart had left town by the south gate. And that before he left... 

In the marketplace near the south gate there was a small shrine. Before leaving 
Claremont, Bonhart had Falka whipped in front of the shrine. In front of everyone, including 
the eyes of the priests of the shrine. He shouted that he would show her who was her lord and 
master. That he could whip her where he wanted, and if he wanted he could beat her to 
death, because no one would take part in it, no one would help her, neither men nor gods. 

Scarra the Younger looked out the window, clinging to the bars. The older ate porridge 
from her bowl. Kohout retrieved his stood, lay down and covered himself with a blanket. 

They heard the bell from the guardhouse and the cries from the sentries on the walls... 

Kenna turned to face the wall. 

A few days later we met, she thought. Me and Bonhart. Face to face. I looked into his 
inhuman fish eyes, that were only thinking about one thing – how to beat this girl. And I took 
one look at his thoughts... Just for a moment. And it was like sticking my head into an open 
grave... 

This happened on the equinox. 

And on the eve of the twenty-second of September, I realised that between us was 
something invisible. 

 

*** 

 


Stefan Skellen, the Imperial Coroner listened without interrupting. But Kenna saw how 
his face changed. 

'Repeat, Selbourne,' he drawled. 'Repeat, I do not believe my ears.' 

'Careful, Mister Coroner,' she murmured. 'Pretend anger... As if I came up with a 
request and you are rejected it. On the surface, that is. I am not mistaken, I'm sure. For at 
least the last two days circling around us is an invisible spy.' 

The Owl had to admit that he was understanding and immediately get his bearings. 

'No, Selbourne, I refuse,' he said aloud, but avoided exaggerated acting with both his 
tone and gestures. 'Discipline applies to all. There are no exceptions. I do not agree!' 

'Hear me out, Mister Coroner,' said Kenna. She had no such acting talent like the Owl, 
but in this case the uncertainty and self-consciousness of the applicant worked quite reliably. 
'At least here me out...' 

'Speak, Selbourne! But short and concise!' 

'They have been spying on us for two days,' she murmured, pretending to humbly explain 
her reasons. 'From Claremont. It has secretly been following us, and comes into our camp 
and moves between people spying.' 

'Listen, fucking spy,' Skellen did not have to fake the anger or severity in his voice which 
trembled with rage. 'How did you find out?' 

'When you were giving orders to Mister Silifant yesterday night before the inn, a cat as 
she slept on a bench, suddenly hissed, bristled her coat and lay her ears flat. I did not suspect, 
because there was no one in there... Then I caught something – A strange thought, someone 
else's will. When you think, the thoughts are familiar, ordinary, but this strange thought, 
Mister Coroner, was if someone had shouted loudly... I began to listen attentively, and found 
him.' 

'Can you always feel him?' 

'Not always. It has some magical protection. I can only feel it at close range, and even 
then not every time. Therefore, we must keep up appearances, since I don't know if he is 
hiding nearby.' 

'Just do not startle him,' growled the Owl. 'Just do not startle him. I want him alive, 
Selbourne. What do you suggest?' 

'We are going to make pancakes.' 

'Pancakes?' 

'Lower your voice, Mister Coroner.' 

'But... Ah, never mind. Agreed. I leave you with a free hand.' 


'Tomorrow we will arrange for us to stay overnight at a village. I'll take care of the 
others. And now, mock rebuke me before I go.' 

'I will not rebuke you,' he winked conspiratorially at her, but then his face became the 
expression of a strict commander. 'I am satisfied with you, Lady Selbourne.' 

He said Lady. Lady Selbourne. Like an officer. He winked again. 

'No!' he said, waving his hand, playing his role brilliantly. 'Request rejected! Be gone!' 

'As you command, Mister Coroner.' 

 

*** 

 

The next day, late in the afternoon, Skellen ordered them to stop in a village on the River 
Lete. The village was rich, surrounded by a palisade; it was entered by a heavy door 
revolving on an axis. The village was called Unicorn. And it took the name from a small 
stone chapel where there was a straw doll representing a unicorn. 

How we laughed at the little god of straw, remembered Kenna, and the mayor, with a 
serious expression, he said the holy Unicorn that had protected the town years ago had been 
made of gold, then silver, then copper, then there were some versions of bone and wood. But 
all had been stolen and looted. Only since the Unicorn had been made of straw had it been 
left alone. 

We stayed in the village for a night. As agree, Skellen housed himself in one of the rustic 
cottages. And in less than an hour we made the invisible spy a pancake. In the classic, 
textbook way. 

 

*** 

 

'Please, approach,' the Owl ordered. 'Please come closer and take a look at this 
document... wait! Is everyone here? I don't want to have to explain the whole thing twice.' 

Ola Harsheim, who was drinking a cup of cream, wiped away a milk moustache, dropped 
his glass, looked around and counted. 

'Dacre Silifant, Bert Brigden, Neratin Ceka, Til Echrade, Joanna Selbourne... No Duffi.' 

'Call him.' 

'Kriel! Duffi Kriel! To the commander for a briefing! For important orders! Run!' 


Duffi Kriel ran breathlessly into the parlour. 

'We're all here, Mister Coroner,' said Ola Harsheim. 

'Open the window, the garlic in here stinks so much you can't breathe. And you can also 
open the door, let in a draft.' 

Brigden obediently opened the door and Kenna again was convinced that the Owl was a 
brilliant actor. 

'Come closer. I have received from the Emperor a top secret and extremely important 
document. Be careful...' 

'Now!' Kenna shouted, sending a strong directional pulse which had the equivalent effect 
on the sense as being struck by lightning. 

Ola Harsheim and Dacre Silifant grabbed buckets and threw cream at the same time at the 
place where Kenna indicated. Til Echrade quickly threw a bag of flour that was hidden under 
the table. On the floor of the room materialised a creamy, floury form, initially formless. But 
Bert Brigden watched. Assessing without error where the head of the pancake might be, and 
hit it with a heavy cast iron skillet. 

Everyone rushed to the cream and flour spy, and took from his head an invisibility cap, 
grabbed him by the arms and legs. They took him to the table where they tied the prisoner to 
the legs of the table. They took of his boots and socks, and stuffed one sock into his mouth to 
stop him screaming. 

To complete their work, Kriel Duffi struck him with delight with a kick to the ribs of the 
prisoner and the rest watch with satisfaction, as the spy's eyes popped from their sockets. 

'Good work,' said the Owl, which during the short time had not moved from his spot and 
stood with his hands crossed on his chest. 'Bravo. I congratulate you. Especially you, Lady 
Joanna.' 

Damn, thought Kenna, if this continues, I might become an officer. 

'Mister Brigden,' Stefan Skellen said in a cold voice, standing next to the prisoner's 
outstretched feet that were tied to the table 'Please put an iron in the fire. Mister Echrade, 
please take a look around outside the room for small children.' 

He bent down and looked into the prisoner's eyes. 

'It has been a long time since you showed yourself, Rience,' he said. 'I had begun to think 
that some misfortune had befallen you.' 

 

*** 

 


The bell announcing the changing of the guard rang. The Scarra sisters snored 
melodiously. Kohout muttered in his sleep, clutching his stool. 

He tried to look brave, Kenna recalled, Rience pretended to have to fear. The Sorcerer 
Rience, looking like a pancake, tied to the legs of a table with his feet bare. He tried to look 
brave. Although he did not fool anyone and least of all me. The Owl had warned me that he 
was a sorcerer, so I muddled his thoughts so he could not cast spells or try and magically get 
help. And I read them. He tried to defend them, but when he smelled the smoke from the 
charcoal fire that was heating the iron, his magical defences and locks opened up like an old 
pair of trousers, and I read to my liking. His thoughts did not differ at all from those others 
who had been in similar situations. 

Delirious thoughts, trembling with fear and despair. Cold, slimy, wet and smelly 
thoughts. Like the interior of a corpse. 

 

*** 

 

'Well Skellen, you win, you caught me. Congratulations. I bow to the technical expertise 
and professionalism. I envy your well-trained people. And now please free me from this 
uncomfortable position.' 

The Owl approached a chair and sat on it backwards, resting his chin on his clasped hands 
on the back of the chair. He looked at the prisoner from above. And was silent. 

'Order them to release me, Skellen,' Rience repeated. 'And then ask your subordinates to 
leave. What I have to say is only for your ears.' 

'Mister Brigden,' the Owl said without turning his head. 'What colour is the iron?' 

'You will still have to wait a bit, Mister Coroner.' 

'Lady Selbourne?' 

'He is hard to read now,' Kenna shrugged. 'He is too afraid. Fear is suppressing all other 
thoughts. Nevertheless, he is still trying to hide a few thoughts behind magic barriers. But it 
will not be a problem, I can...' 

'No need. Let us use the traditional method – red-hot iron.' 

'Fuck!' howled the spy. 'Skellen! You're not going...' 

The Owl leaned forward, his face changing slightly. 

'Firstly, Lord Skellen,' he said. 'Secondly, yes I am. I'm going to tickle you with a hot 
poker. I'll do it with inexpressible pleasure. And I'll treat it as an expression of historical 
justice. I bet you do not understand.' 


Rience remained silent, so Skellen continued. 

'You know, Rience, I counselled Vattier de Rideaux to burn your heels even then, seven 
years ago, when you crawled up to the imperial intelligence like a dog, begging for the 
privilege to be a double agent. I gave him the same advice four years ago, when you climbed 
in Emhyr's ass and started meditating contact with Vilgefortz. And when you received the 
task of hunting the Cintran, you moved from an ordinary little traitor to a resident. I bet 
Vattier that if we gave you a taste of red-hot iron, we'd find out who you served... No, that 
was poorly expressed. We'd find out all who serve and all those who betray. Then I told him, 
Vattier that he'd be amazed as to how much the two lists match. But Vattier de Rideaux 
ignored me. And now surely he regrets it. But nothing is lost. I'm going to roast you a bit, to 
find out what you know, and then I will put you at the disposal of Vattier. And he is going to 
remove your skin, slowly, in small fragments.' 

The Owl took a handkerchief and a bottle of perfume from his pocket. He liberally 
sprinkled the handkerchief and held it to his nose. The perfume smelled pleasantly of musk, 
yet Kenna wanted to vomit. 

'The iron, Mister Brigden.' 

'I followed you on Vilgefortz command!' Rience cried. 'It is the girl! I was following 
your squad; I was hoping to stall you before you got to this bounty hunter! I was to try and 
bargain with him for the girl! From him, not from you! Because you want to kill her and 
Vilgefortz needs her alive! What more do you want to know? I'll tell! I'll tell you 
everything!' 

'Well, well!' The Owl cried. 'Slow down! Both noise and lots of information can give 
one a headache. Can you imagine, gentlemen, what will happen when we roast him? We will 
go deaf in the end!' 

Kriel and Silifant laughed out loud, but Kenna, Neratin and Ceka did not join them. Bert 
Brigden also maintained his seriousness as he pulled the hot poker from the glowing coals 
and stared at it intently. The iron rod was so hot it seemed almost translucent – like liquid fire 
filling a glass tube. 

Rience saw it and screamed. 

'I know how to find the bounty hunter and the Cintran! I know how! I'll tell you!' 

'I do not doubt it.' 

Kenna, who was still trying to read his thoughts, frowned upon receiving a wave of rage 
and impotent despair. In Rience brain, again something broke, another barrier. He was so 
afraid that he was going to say something, Kenna thought, which he planned to keep until the 
end, as a trump card, an ace up his sleeve that could have defeated everyone else's cards in a 
final and decisive suit to the highest bidder. Now, pure and simple fear of pain will put that 
card on the table. 


Suddenly something was poured into her head; she felt heat in her temples, then a sudden 
cold. 

And she knew. She had found Rience hidden thoughts. 

By the gods, she thought, what a mess I've gotten... 

'I'll talk!' screamed the sorcerer, flushing and fixing his bulging eyes on the coroner. 'I 
tell you something really important, Skellen! Vattier de Rideaux...' 

Kenna suddenly heard another strange thought. She saw Neratin Ceka, hand on his dagger 
move towards the door. 

The pounding of boots. Boreas Mun entered the council room. 

'Mister Coroner! Hurry, Mister Coroner! You'll never believe who has arrived...' 

Skellen, with a gesture, stopped Brigden, who was moving the iron towards the heels of 
the spy. 

'You ought to play the lottery, Rience,' he said, looking out the window. 'I have never 
seen anyone with as much luck as you.' 

Through the window they could see people in a group, and in the centre of the group, a 
couple on horseback. Kenna knew immediately who they were. She knew who the giant man 
with the pale fish eyes, on the tall bay was. And who the grey-haired girl mounted on a 
beautiful black mare was. With her hands tied and a chain around her neck. With dark bruises 
on her swollen cheek. 

 

*** 

 

Vysogota returned to his hut in a foul mood, depressed, silent and angry even. The cause 
was the talk of a villager who had come by a canoe to collect his skins. 'This maybe the last 
time before spring', said the villager. 'The weather gets worse from day to day, the rain and 
the wind have made one afraid to come by boat. In the morning there is ice in the puddles, I 
think soon we are going to see snow. The river will freeze and I will have to hide the boat and 
pull a sled. But here in the Pereplut you cannot even get to in a sled, due to all the bogs.' 

The villager was right. In the evening the sky became over cast and it started to pour 
heavy snowflakes. Gusty winds from the east whipped the cattails and waves rose in the 
usually calm river. The penetrating cold crawled into his old bones. 

The day after tomorrow, Vysogota thought, is festival of Saovine. According to the Elvish 
calendar within three days will be a new year. According to the calendar of humans we will 
have to wait two more moths for the New Year. 


Kelpie, the black mare of Ciri's, was kicking and snorting in the goat pen. 

When he entered the cottage, he found Ciri searching the trunks. He let her do it, even 
encouraged her. First, it was a completely new thing, after riding Kelpie and reading books. 
Second, in the trunks he had quite a bit of his daughters stuff and she needed warmer clothes. 
Several changes of clothes, because it had been cold and damp for days and the washed 
clothes hadn't dried. 

Ciri chose, tried on, rejected and took off. Vysogota sat at the table. He ate two boiled 
potatoes and chicken wings. He remained silent. 

'Good craftsmanship,' she showed him an item that he had not seen for years and had 
forgotten he had. 'Did this belong to your daughter? Did she like to skate?' 

'She loved it. She looked forward to winter.' 

'Can I take them?' 

'Take what you want,' he shrugged his shoulders. 'I have no use for them. If they are 
useful and the shoe fits... But is this preparing your luggage, Ciri? Are you preparing to go?' 

'Yes, Vysogota,' she said after a moment of silence. 'I've decided. Because, you know... 
there is no time to lose.' 

'Your dreams?' 

'Yes,' she admitted after a while. 'I've seen bad things in my dreams. I'm not sure if it 
has already taken place, or whether this is just the future. I don't know if I can prevent it... 
But I have to go. See, I, at one point, complained that my friends had not come to my aid. I 
was left to the mercy of fate... And now I think that maybe they need my help. I have to go.' 

'Winter is coming.' 

'That is why I have to go. If I stay, I'll be stuck until spring... Until spring, I'll be 
worrying with inactivity and uncertainty and haunted by nightmares. I have to go, I have to 
go now to try and find the Tower of the Swallow. The teleporter. You yourself have 
estimated that going up the river it will be a fifteen day journey. I could get there before 
November's full moon...' 

'You cannot leave your sanctuary now,' he murmured with effort. 'Not now. Your 
pursuers are close... Very close. You cannot...' 

She threw down a shirt and rose like she was driven by a spring. 

'You have heard something,' she strongly stated the fact. 'From the villager who took the 
skins. Tell me.' 

'Ciri...' 

'Tell me, please!' 


He told her. He later regretted it. 

 

*** 

 

'The think devil sent them, honourable Mister Hermit,' murmured the peasant, stopping 
for a moment counting the skins. 'The devil I guess. Since the Equinox they have roamed the 
woods, looking for a girl. They then raided the villages, shouting, threatening, scaring, but 
then moved on. Well, we could endure it. Now there are new innovations. They have left a 
patrol in the villages – three to four bandits who we must look after. Perhaps they will remain 
all winter. They said they will wait for the girl they seek to come out of hiding at one of the 
villages. So she can be trapped.' 

'And they are also in your village?' 

The villager scowled and gritted his teeth. 

'There are none in our village, we were lucky. But half a day away from us in Dun Dare, 
there sits four. They hang about in the tavern. They are scoundrels, Mister Hermit, scoundrels 
and downright disgusting. They started badgering the young women from the village, and 
when the men stood up to them, Mister Hermit, they were slain without mercy...' 

'They killed people from the village?' 

'Two. The Mayor and one other. Tell me, Mister Hermit, does no punishment come to 
such bastards! Is there no law? A councillor who came to us from Dun Dare with his wife and 
daughter said he was going out into the world and he would find a witcher... They clean up 
all manner of villainy. He would invite a witcher to Dun Dare to take care of these 
scoundrels...' 

'Witchers kill monsters, not people.' 

'They are villains, good Mister Hermit; they are not people, only rogues sent from hell. A 
witcher is needed, a witcher... Well it is time for me to be on my way, Mister Hermit... Uh, 
it is getting cold! Soon I will have to hide the boat and pull a sled... And for the bastards in 
Dun Dare, Mister Hermit, a witcher is needed.' 

 

*** 

 

'He's right,' Ciri said through clenched teeth. 'He's right. It takes a witcher... Or a 
witcheress. Four, right? In Dun Dare, right? And where is this Dun Dare? Upriver? Can I get 
there through the swamp?' 


'By the gods, Ciri,' Vysogota was frightened. 'You cannot be serious...' 

'Do not swear by the gods if you do not believe in them. And I know that you don't 
believe.' 

'Leave aside my beliefs. Ciri, what crazy ideas are hatching in your head? How can you 
even...' 

'Now it is your turn to leave aside my belief, Vysogota. I know what my duty is. I'm a 
witcher!' 

'You are young and erratic,' snapped the old man. 'You are a child who has suffered a 
severe trauma. A hurt child, neurotic and close to a nervous breakdown. And above all you 
are sick with your desire for revenge! Do you not understand?' 

'I understand it better then you!' she cried. 'You have no idea what I went through! You 
have no idea of revenge, because you have never really been hurt!' 

She ran from the hut. An icy wind burst through the open doors. After a moment he heard 
neighing and the clatter of hooves. 

Angry, he hit the plate on the table. Let her go, he thought furiously, ride off some of her 
rage. He was not afraid for her, she often rode through the swamp, and she had learned the 
safe path between the marshes. And if by chance she got lost, she could loosen the reins, 
Kelpie knew the way home, to the goat pen. 

After some time, when dusk fell, he went out and hung a lantern on a pole. He stood by 
the hedge, straining to hear the clatter of hooves or the splashing of water. However the wind 
through the reeds drowned out all other noise. The lantern stirred drunkenly on the pole for a 
moment and then went out. 

At that moment he heard it. From a distance. Not in the direction that Ciri had gone, but 
from the opposite direction. From the swamp. 

A savage inhuman, prolonged, wailing cry. A howl. And a moment of silence. And once 
again. 

A Beann'shie. 

An elven spirit. A messenger of death. 

Vysogota shook with cold and fear. He went back quickly into the hut, muttering and 
mumbling under his breath so as not to hear, because it should not be heard. 

Before he could relight the lantern, Kelpie emerged from the fog. 

'Let's go into the hut,' Ciri said softly. 'And do not go out. Tonight will be an awful 
night.' 

 


*** 

 

During dinner they quarrelled again. 

'It seems you know a lot about the problems of good and evil!' 

'Because I know! And not just from books from a college!' 

'No, of course. You know all from personal experience. From practice. You have 
accumulated a wealth of experiences in your long, sixteen-year life.' 

'I have gathered much.' 

'Congratulations. Fellow colleague.' 

'You mock me,' she said taking a deep breath. 'Yet you have no idea how bad it is in the 
world, you senile scientists, theorists with your books, with centuries of experience in reading 
moral treatises, so diligent that you haven't even had time to look out the window and see 
what it looks like in the real world. You, philosophers, artificially supporting artificial 
philosophies to collect your salary at the university. A dog with a lame leg would not pay you 
for the ugly truth about the world, and you came up with ethics and morals – a nice optimistic 
learning. But fraudulent and deceptive!' 

'Nothing is fraudulent and deceptive, brat! Than a judgement hasty and unbalanced!' 

'You have not found a cure for evil! And I, a witcher brat, I found it! A reliable cure!' 

He did not answer, but his face betrayed his opinion, because Ciri abruptly jumped up 
from the table. 

'Do you think that I am talking nonsense? That I am speaking just to speak?' 

'I think,' he said quietly, 'that you speak in anger. I think that you are planning revenge in 
anger. Therefore, I urge you to calm down.' 

'I am calm! And revenge? Explain to me why not? Why should I give up revenge? On 
behalf of what? Moral principles? And what of the higher order of things, in which evil 
deeds are punished? For you, a philosopher and ethicists, an act of revenge is bad, 
disgraceful, unethical and illegal. But I ask: where is the punishment for evil? Who has is and 
grants access? The Gods, in which you do not believe? The great demiurge-creator, which 
you decided to replace the gods with? Or maybe the law? Maybe with Nilfgaardian justice, 
with judges and imperial prefects? Naïve old man!' 

'So an eye for an eye, tooth for a tooth, blood for blood. And for that blood, more blood, a 
sea of blood. Do you want the world to drown in blood? You naïve and wounded girl. So you 
can fight against evil, witcher?' 


'Yes. Exactly so! Because I know what evil is afraid of. Not your ethics, Vysogota, not 
your preaching or moral treaties on the life of dignity. Evil is afraid of pain, mutilation, 
suffering and at the end of the day, death! The dog howls when it is badly wounded! Writhing 
on the ground and growls, watching the blood flow from it veins and arteries, seeing the bone 
that sticks out from a stump, watching its guts escape its open belly, feeling the cold as death 
is about to take them. Then and only then will evil begin to beg, 'Have mercy! I regret my 
sins! I'll be good, I swear! Just save me, do not let me waste away!' Yes, hermit. That is the 
way to fight evil! When evil wants to harm you, inflict pain – anticipate them, it's best if evil 
does not expect it. But if you fail to prevent evil, if you have been hurt by evil, then avenge 
him! It is best when they have already forgotten, when they feel safe. Then pay them in 
double. In triple. An eye for an eye? No! Both eyes for an eye! A tooth for a tooth? No! All 
their teeth for a tooth! Repay evil! Make it wail in pain, howling until their eyes pop from 
their sockets. And then, you can look under your feet and boldly declare that what is there 
cannot hurt endanger anyone, cannot hurt anyone. How can someone be a danger, when they 
have no eyes? How can someone hurt when they have no hands? They can only wait until 
they bleed to death.' 

'And you,' said the hermit, 'stand with a sword in your hand and look at the growing 
puddle of blood. And you have the arrogance to think that you've solved the age-old 
dilemma, answered the eternal question of philosophers. Do you think the nature of Evil has 
changed?' 

'Sure,' she said firmly. 'Because what lies on the ground and drowns in blood, that's not 
evil. Maybe it is not good, but it is no longer evil!' 

'Scholars say that nature abhors a vacuum,' said Vysogota. 'What lies on the ground 
drowning in blood, which you fell with your sword, and isn't evil. So what is it? Have you 
thought about that?' 

'No. I am a witcher. When I was taught, I swore to fight evil. Always. And without 
thinking.' 

'Because when you start to think,' she added in a low voice, 'the killing ceases to make 
sense. And that cannot be allowed.' 

He shook his head, but she waved and prevented him from arguing. 

'It is time to finish my story, Vysogota. I have told you for over three nights, from the 
equinox to Saovine. And yet I have not told you everything. Before I go, you should learn 
what happened in the village named Unicorn...' 

 

*** 

 


She cried as she was pulled from the saddle. The hip, in which she had been kicked 
yesterday, hurt. He jerked on her chain collar and dragged her to a building. 

At the cottage door stood a few armed men. And one woman. 

'Bonhart,' said one of the men, slim and dark, in his hand was a brass spiked whip. 'I'll 
have to admit that you can surprise people.' 

'Hello, Skellen.' 

The man named Skellen approached her captor as he looked straight into her eyes. She 
shivered under his gaze. 

'So?' he turned to look at Bonhart. 'Will you be explaining it all at once or little by 
little?' 

'I do not like to explain anything in the courtyard, where flies can crawl into the mouth. 
Are you going to invite me in?' 

'Come in.' 

Bonhart jerked the chain collar. 

In the house was another man, dishevelled and pale, perhaps a chef, because he was busy 
cleaning his clothes that were covered in flour and cream. Seeing Ciri, his eyes sparkled. He 
approached. 

He was not a chef. 

She recognised him; she remembered those terrible eyes and the burn on his face. It was 
he who along with the Squirrels had been pursuing her in Thanedd, she had escaped from him 
by jumping out of a window and he had ordered the elves to go after her. What did the elf call 
him? Rens? 

'Well, well!' he said with a venomous voice, while he planted his hand hard and painfully 
into her chest. 'Lady Ciri! We have not seen each other since Thanedd. I've been looking for 
you for a long, long time. And now I have finally found you!' 

'I don't know who you are, sir,' Bonhart said coldly. 'But what you have found is mine; 
keep your hands off of her, if you value your fingers.' 

'My name is Rience,' the wizard's eyes shone in an unpleasant manner. 'Do yourself a 
favour and remember it, sir bounty hunter. And who I am, you will see soon. You'll also see 
who the girl belongs too. But let's not get ahead of events. For now, I just want to convey my 
greetings and make a promise. You do not have anything against that, I hope?' 

'You are free to wait for whatever you want.' 

Rience approached Ciri; he looked closely into her eyes. 


'Your guardian, the witch Yennefer,' he hissed viciously, 'once crossed my path. When 
she fell into my hands, I, Rience, taught her pain. With these hands, these fingers. And I 
made her a promise that if you fell into my hands, princess, that you would also learn the 
same pain. With these hands, these fingers...' 

'Risky,' Bonhart said quietly. 'Very risky, Mister Rience, or whoever you are, to tease 
my girl and threaten her. She is vindictive, prepare to remember that. Keep, I repeat, your 
hands and fingers and all other body parts away from her.' 

'Enough,' Skellen snapped, not taking his eyes from Ciri. 'Leave him, Bonhart. And you, 
Rience, calm down too. I have granted mercy, but I can think better of it and tie you back to 
the legs of the table. Both of you sit. Let's talk like civilized people. It seems we have what 
we want. And the object of our conversation is still under guard. Mister Silifant!' 

'Just look after her well,' Bonhart gave the chain to Silifant. 'Like the apple of your eye.' 

 

*** 

 

Kenna stayed on the side-lines. Yes, she wanted to look at the girl who had generated so 
much talk lately, but she felt a strange compunction to get into the crowd surrounding 
Harsheim and Silifant who led the enigmatic prisoner to a pillar in the courtyard. 

Everyone pushed and stared and tried to touch, pinch and scratch her. She walked stiffly, 
limping a bit with her head held high. He has beaten her, thought Kenna. But she has not 
broken. 

'So this is Falka.' 

'She is a girl, barely an adult!' 

'A girl? She is a rogue!' 

'And apparently went up against six men in the Claremont arena...' 

'And how many before... bitch...' 

'She wolf!' 

'Look at her mare! A wonderful pure blood... And there, attached to Bonhart's 
saddlebags, what a sword... A wonder...' 

'Leave her alone!' Dacre Silifant barked. 'Do not touch her! Keep your hands out of the 
affairs of others. And away from the girl too. Do not show her disgust or scorn! Show a little 
compassion. Give her a bit of room.' 


'If she is going to die,' Cyprian Fripp the younger showed his teeth, 'maybe we can 
sweeten and comfort the remnant of her life? Take her to the hay and fuck her?' 

'Of course!' laughed Cabernik Turnet. 'That is not a bad idea. We'll go ask The Owl...' 

'I forbid it,' Dacre cut them off. 'Can you not think of anything else, you whoreson! I told 
you to leave the girl alone. Andres, Stigward, stand there with her. Do not take your eyes off 
her. And any who come too close, use the whip!' 

'Damn!' cursed Fripp. 'If not, then we do not care. Come on fellas, let's go roast a 
suckling pig and feast. The equinox holiday is today. While the gentry chatter, we can 
celebrate.' 

'Let's go! A drink, Dede, a jug of rum. Let's drink! Can we, Mister Silifant? Mister 
Harsheim? Today is a holiday, and we are not leaving here tonight.' 

'What a good idea!' Silifant frowned. 'Feast and booze! And who will stay here to help 
protect the girl and be ready to answer the call of Lord Stefan?' 

'I'll stay,' said Neratin Ceka. 

'And I,' said Kenna. 

 Dacre Silifant looked at them carefully. At last accepting with a wave of his hand. Fripp 
and company thanked him with a roar. 

'But watch out during the celebrations!' Ola Harsheim warned. 'Do not take offence if 
the village girls do not let you fuck them!' 

'Oh yeah! Are you coming with us Chloe? And you, Kenna? Will you not change your 
mind?' 

'No. I'm staying.' 

 

*** 

 

'I was left attached to the pillar, shackled, with my hands tied. I was watched by two of 
Skellen's people. A further two were standing nearby and paying attention. A tall and very 
pretty woman. And a man. And a man with a somewhat feminine appearance and 
movements. Very strange.' 

The cat was sitting in the middle of the room yawning hard, bored because the mouse it 
was tormenting was no longer fun. Vysogota was silent. 


'Bonhart, Rience and Skellen, or the Owl, were still talking in the council hall. I did not 
know why. I had to expect the worst, but I was resigned. Yet another arena? Or were they just 
going to kill me? Let them, I thought, Let it finally be over.' 

Vysogota was silent. 

 

*** 

 

Bonhart sighed. 

'Do not look into these eyes, Skellen' he repeated. 'I just want to make some money. For 
me, I think it is time to retire, sit on the porch, watching the pigeons. For each of the rats I'll 
get a hundred florins, for them dead. That puzzled me. How much can this girl really be 
worth, I thought. I figured that if I did not give her to you, she would be more profitable in 
the long run. The old principal of a deal – such a precious commodity is constantly gaining in 
price. One can bargain...' 

The Owl wrinkled his nose as if something stunk. 

'You are sincere even beyond the point of endurance, Bonhart. But get to the point, 
clarify. You flee with the girl across Ebbing, and suddenly show up and explain everything 
with the laws of economics. Explain what happened.' 

'What is there to explain,' Rience smiled sarcastically. 'Mister Bonhart has simply 
learned who the girl really is. And what she is worth.' 

Skellen did not deign to look. He looked at Bonhart, his fish-like eyes devoid of 
expression. 

'And this precious girl,' he drawled, 'this valuable prize that is supposed to guarantee 
your pension, you push into the arena in Claremont and compel her to fight to the death? 
Risking her life, though apparently it is worth much more living. How come, Bonhart? 
Because something is wrong here.' 

'If she was killed in the arena,' Bonhart did not lower his eyes, 'that would mean that she 
was worth nothing.' 

'I understand,' The Owl frowned. 'But instead of leading the girl to another arena, you 
brought her to me. May I ask, why?' 

'Again,' Rience frowned. 'He found out who she is.' 

'You are smart, Mister Rience,' Bonhart stretched until his joints cracked. 'You guessed 
it. I found out that she had trained with the witchers in Kaer Morhen, but there was another 
question. In Geso, during an attack on a noblewoman, the girl told a baroness that her high 


birth and title were worth shit and the she should kneel before her. Then I thought that Falka 
was at least a countess. Curious. First a witcher. Are there a lot of witchers? Then the band of 
rats, second. And the Imperial Coroner chasing after her since Korath in Ebbing with orders 
to kill, third. And more than that... a noble, and high-born. Ha, I thought, I must finally learn 
who this girl actually is.' 

He paused. 

'At first,' he wiped his moustache on the cuff of his sleeve, 'she did not want to talk. I 
asked her. I hit her hands and feet with a whip. I didn't want to maim her... But with luck we 
came across a barber. With instruments to pull teeth. I tied her to a chair...' 

Skellen gulped audibly. Rience smiled cruelly. Bonhart looked at his sleeve. 

'She told me everything... As soon as she saw the instruments, dental pliers and blades. 
All of a sudden she became more talkative. Turns out she is...' 

'The Princess of Cintra,' Rience said looking at The Owl. 'The heir to the throne. And 
candidate bride of Emperor Emhyr.' 

'Mister Skellen failed to inform me,' the bounty hunter twisted his lips. 'He told me to 
just kill her; he pointed in out several times. Killed on the spot and without any mercy. But 
what is this, Mister Skellen? To kill the queen? The future wife of your beloved Emperor? 
Which if you believe the rumours, the Emperor only thinks of holy matrimony, after which 
will come a large amnesty?' 

While pitching his speech, Bonhart's eyes pierced Skellen's. But the Imperial Coroner 
never looked down. 

'What does this mean for me?' Bonhart asked rhetorically and immediately answered. 
'Shit! So then, with regret, I had to give up my plans for the little witcheress and princess. I 
brought this whole mess here, Mister Skellen. To talk and come to an agreement... Because 
this shit seems to be a bit big for one Bonhart...' 

'A good decision,' something yelled from under Rience's arm. 'A very good decision, 
Mister Bonhart. What you have captured gentlemen, is something a little bit too big for both 
of you. Fortunately, you still have me.' 

'What is that?' Skellen rose from his chair. 'What the hell is that?' 

'My master, the sorcerer Vilgefortz,' Rience pulled out from under his arm a silver shiny 
box. 'More specifically, the voice of my master. Coming from this magical device called a 
Xenophon.' 

'I greet all those present,' said the box. 'It is a shame I can only hear you, but some urgent 
matters prevent me from teleprojecting or teleportation.' 


'Shit, this is all we need,' The Owl swore. 'But I should have guessed that Rience was too 
stupid to act on his own. I should have known that you were hiding in the darkness, 
Vilgefortz. Like an old fat spider, lying in waiting in the dark, waiting for the web to vibrate.' 

'What a most offensive comparison.' 

Skellen snorted. 

'And do not try and deceive us, Vilgefortz. Rience is using this box not because you are 
busy, but because you are afraid of the army of sorcerers, your former comrades of the 
Chapter, who are scanning the world looking for traces of magic with your algorithm. If you 
tried to teleport, they would find you in a flash.' 

'What an impressive knowledge.' 

'We have not been introduced to each other,' Bonhart rather theatrically bowed to the 
silver box. 'But if I'm correct, Sir Sorcerer, Mister Rience here promises to torture the 
princess. Have I made a mistake? On my soul, I am continually making sure of how 
important this girl is. Everyone is interested in her.' 

'We have not been introduced to each other,' said Vilgefortz from the box. 'But I know 
you, Sir Bonhart, as well. And the girl is certainly important. This Lion Cub of Cintra is of 
the Elder Blood. And according to the prophecy of Ithlinne, her descendants will rule the 
world.' 

'That's why you need her?' 

'I only need the placenta. When I extract it from her, you can have the rest. Do I hear 
snorts? What about upset and disgusted sighs? Whose? From Bonhart who every day tortures 
the girl both physically and mentally? Stefan Skellen, who is ordered by traitors and 
conspirators to kill the girl? Huh?' 

 

*** 

 

I eavesdropped on them, Kenna remembered, lying on the bunk with her hands behind her 
head. I was standing in a corner and felt. And my hair stood on end. All over my body. And 
suddenly I understood the terrible mess that I had gotten into. 

 

*** 

 

'Yes, yes' the voice emerged from the Xenophon, 'you betrayed your Emperor, Skellen. 
Without hesitation and at the earliest opportunity.' 


The Owl snorted with contempt. 

'The charge of betrayal from the mouth of the arch-traitor as you are, Vilgefortz is very 
tremendous. I would be honoured. Had it not smacked of a cheap joke.' 

'I do not accuse you of treason, Skellen; I make fun of your naiveté and your inability to 
treason. Because, why betray your master? For Ardal aep Dahy and De Wett, dukes, in their 
pathological offended pride, offended that their daughters were repulsed by the Emperor, 
when he planned to marry the Cintran. At the same time they counted on the fact that from 
their families would arise a new dynasty, that their importance would overshadow even the 
Imperial Majesty. With one stroke, Emhyr deprived them of this hope and they decided to 
improve the course of history. They are not ready for an armed rebellion, but they can still 
kill the girl who moved ahead of their daughters. They do not want to mess their own 
aristocratic hands, so they found a henchman for hire, Stefan Skellen, who suffers from 
excessive ambition. How was that, Skellen? Do you want to say something?' 

'What for?' The Owl cried. 'And to whom? But you know everything, as usual, great 
sorcerer! Rience as usual doesn't know shit! And Bonhart doesn't care...' 

'And you, as I have pointed out, have nothing to brag about. The Dukes bought you with 
promises, but you are to intelligent not to understand that without the girl you have nothing. 
They need you as a tool to remove the Cintran and once you have finished the dirty work 
they'll get rid of you because you are a low-born upstart. They promised you and Vattier de 
Rideaux positions in the new empire? Not even you, yourself believe it, Skellen. Vattier is 
more necessary, because of the coup, but the secret service will always be the same. They just 
want to kill with your hands, Vattier they need to control the secret service. Besides, Vattier 
is a Viscount and you are nothing.' 

'Certainly,' said The Owl. 'I'm too intelligent not to have noticed. So then, now I am to 
betray Ardal aep Dahy and join you, Vilgefortz? Is that what you want? But I'm not a 
weather vane on a tower! I support the revolution, not from opportunism but from conviction. 
It is necessary to put an end to the absolute tyranny and establish a constitutional monarchy. 
And after a democracy...' 

'A what?' 

'A government of the people. A system in which people rule. Ordinary citizens of all 
backgrounds, through the most worth and honourable representatives arising from fair 
elections...' 

Rience roared with laughter. Bonhart thunderously joined him. A warm, if somewhat 
grating laugh came from the sorcerer Vilgefortz through the Xenophon. All three laughed 
until they cried. 

'Come,' Bonhart interrupted the mirth. 'We have not gathered here to party, but to talk 
business. The girl at the moment does not belong to ordinary citizens of all backgrounds, but 
to me. But I can sell her. What is your offer, Sir Sorcerer?' 


'Are you interested in power over the world?' 

'No.' 

'Therefore, I'll let you,' Vilgefortz said slowly, 'be present at the same time, when I do 
what I need to, to the girl. I know this will please you more than anything else.' 

Bonhart's eyes flashed with white flame. But remained calm. 

'And more specifically?' 

'More specifically, I am willing to pay twenty times your stake. Two thousand florins. 
Consider, Bonhart, it is a bag of money that you will not be able to carry yourself; you will 
need a pack mule. That will suffice for the pension, porch, pigeons and even the vodka and 
whores if you keep a reasonable moderation.' 

'All right, Sir Sorcerer,' the bounty hunter smiled, seemingly unconcerned. 'The vodka 
and those whores have certainly reached my heart. Let's make a deal. However take into 
account that your first offer is also reflected in this. It is true, I'd rather watch her die in an 
arena, but your work with a knife I am also quite curious about. Add it as a bonus.' 

'Deal.' 

'That was quick,' The Owl said wryly. 'Truly, Vilgefortz you have quickly and smoothly 
made a partnership with Bonhart. A partnership that is societas leonina. But have you not 
forgotten something? The council room where you sit, and around the Cintran are surrounded 
by armed people. My people.' 

'My dear Coroner Skellen,' Vilgefortz voice rang from the box. 'You insult me, thinking 
that in this exchange I want to hurt you. Quite the contrary. I'm going to be extremely 
generous. I cannot ensure your democracy. But I can promise financial assistance, logistical 
support and free access to information that will make you stop being a tool for the other 
conspirators and become a partner. They will have to reckon with you, Duke Joachim de 
Wett, Duke Ardal aep Dahy, Earl Broinne, Earl Darvi and all the other noble conspirators. So 
what if it is societas leonina? Yes if the loot is Cirilla, I will take the lion's share of the spoils 
for my, as I believe, merits. Does this hurt you? At the end of the day you will have benefits 
that are not small. If you give me the Cintran, you can have the position of Vattier de Rideaux 
in your pocket. And being the head of the secret services, Stefan Skellen, you can make your 
various utopias, including democracy and fair elections. You see, in exchange for the thin 
teenager, I'll grant you the fulfilment of the ambitions and desires of your life. Do you see?' 

'No,' The Owl shook his head. 'I can only hear.' 

'Rience.' 

'Yes, master?' 

'Give Mister Coroner a sample of our information. Tell him what you know of Vattier.' 


'In your unit,' said Rience, 'there is a spy.' 

'What?' 

'You heard. Vattier de Rideaux has a mole here. He knows everything you do. Why you 
do it and for whom. Vattier has gotten to one of your agents.' 

 

*** 

 

He approached her slowly. She almost did not hear him. 

'Kenna.' 

'Neratin.' 

'You were open to my thoughts. There, in the council room. You know what I was 
thinking. So you know who I am.' 

'Listen, Neratin...' 

'No. You listen, Joanna Selbourne. Stefan Skellen betrays his country and emperor. He 
conspires. All who are with him will end up on the scaffold. Quartered by horses in 
Millennium Square.' 

'I know nothing, Neratin. I am just following orders... What do you want from me? I 
serve the Coroner... And who do you serve?' 

'The Empire. Lord de Rideaux.' 

'What do you want from me?' 

'You show common sense.' 

'Leave. I will not betray you; I will not say anything... but go, please. I cannot, Neratin. I 
am a simple woman. I do not understand these intrigues...' 

 

*** 

 

What am I supposed to do? Skellen addressed me as Office Selbourne. But whom do I 
serve? Him? The Emperor? The Empire? 

How do I decide? 


Kenna leaned back against the wall of the cottage, and with a menacing growl drove away 
the rural brats staring at the chained up Falka. 

A beautiful mess. I can feel the noose. Smell the horse shit on Millennium Square. I have 
no idea what will happen. But I have to enter for a moment to know her thoughts. 

To know who she is. 

To understand. 

 

*** 

 

'She moved closer,' Ciri said, stroking the cat. 'She was tall, well groomed, and very 
different from the rest of the gang... Even in her own way pretty. She produced respect. The 
two that were watching me, two simpletons who were cursing vulgarly stopped when she 
approached.' 

Vysogota was silent. 

'Then,' Ciri continued, 'she bowed and looked into my eyes. At that moment I noticed 
something... something strange... like something hit me in the back of my head. My ears 
where ringing. For a moment there very clearly before my eyes... Something came into me, 
disgusting, slimy... I knew what it was. Yennefer had taught me about it in the temple... But 
I did not want to allow this woman... So I pushed at the something that was penetrating me, 
pushed and spat out, with all the power that I could muster. The tall woman bent and swayed 
as if hit by a fist and took two steps back... Blood started rushing from her nose. From both 
holes.' 

Vysogota was silent. 

'And suddenly,' Ciri lifted her head, 'I realised what had happened. I suddenly felt the 
Power within me. I lost it there in the Korath desert, renounced it. Later I could not draw on 
it, I couldn't use it. And she, this woman gave me strength; put the sword in my hand. This 
was my chance.' 

 

*** 

 

Kenna staggered and sat down heavily in the sand, shaking her head and fumbling around 
on the ground like a drunk. Blood poured from her nose and spilled over her lips and chin. 

'What is...' Andres Vierny sprang up, but suddenly he grabbed his head with both hands, 
opened his mouth, and from his lips came a shout. With wide eyes he stared at Stigward. The 


man's nose and ears were also bleeding and his eyes were clouded. Andres fell to his knees 
and turned to Neratin Ceka, who stood to one side and watched calmly. 

'Nera...tin...Help...' 

Ceka did not move. He watched the girl. She looked up at him and he reeled. 

'There is no need,' he warned her quickly. 'I'm on your side. I want to help. Stop, I'll cut 
the ties... Here's a knife, open up your collar. I will bring the horses.' 

'Ceka...' Andres choked from his stifled larynx. 'Traitor...' 

 The girl looked into his eyes again, and fell to the floor motionless. Stigward curled up 
into the foetal position. Kenna could still not get up, blood dripped in thick drops down her 
chest and abdomen. 

'Alarm!' cried Chloe Stitz, who suddenly appeared from behind a corner of the building. 
'Alarm! Silifant! Skellen! The prisoner is escaping!' 

Ciri was already in the saddle. Her sword was in her hand. 

'Yaaa! Kelpie!' 

'Alaaaarm!' 

Kenna clawed at the sand. She could not get up. Nor would her feet which felt like wood, 
obey her. A psionic, she thought, I've run into a superpsionic. This girl is ten times stronger 
than me... Luckily I have not been killed... How am I still even conscious? 

From the surrounding houses approached a group headed by Ola Harsheim, Bert Brigden 
and Til Echrade, also rushing into the square were Dacre Silifant and Boreas Mun. Ciri 
turned and yelled and galloped towards the river. But from that way armed men were 
approaching as well. 

Skellen and Bonhart rushed out of the council building. Bonhart held a naked sword. 
Neratin Ceka shouted, approaching them on his horse knocking down Skellen. From the 
saddle, he threw himself directly at Bonhart and held him to the ground. Rience appeared in 
the doorway and stared like a fool. 

'Get her!' Skellen yelled, rising from the ground. 'Catch her or kill her!' 

'Alive!' Rience cried. 'Aliiiive!' 

Kenna watched as the girl move away from the palisade along the shore and change 
direction and headed for the gate. She saw Cabernik Turent jump into her path, she saw the 
sword flash and saw the crimson stream flow from Turent's neck. Dede Vargas and Fripp the 
Younger also saw it. They decided not to get in the way of the girl and moved in between the 
cottages. 


Bonhart jumped up, smashed the pommel of his sword into Neratin Ceka's head and 
slashed him across the chest. He immediately jumped up after Ciri. The wounded and 
bleeding Neratin, still managed to grab him by the foot, only to let go when Bonhart's sword 
speared through him into the sand. However, those few moments were enough. 

She spurred the mare to move past Silifant and Mun. Skellen, bent like a wolf, came 
running from the left, waving his hand. Kenna saw something shining in flight, then saw the 
girl swaying in the saddle, and from her face gushed a fountain of blood. She leaned back so 
far that for a moment her back lay on the haunches of the mare. But before she fell, she 
straightened up, grabbed the saddle and held onto the horse's neck. The black mare, galloped 
through the crowed of armed men and rushed straight towards the revolving gate. Behind her 
ran Mun, Silifant and Chloe Stitz with a crossbow. 

'We have her!' Boreas Mun shouted triumphantly. 'She cannot get out, no horse can jump 
seven feet!' 

'Do not shoot, Chloe!' 

Chloe Stitz did not hear the shouted command. She stopped. She raised the crossbow to 
her cheek. Everyone knew that Chloe never missed. 

'You're a dead man!' she cried. 'A dead man!' 

Kenna saw an unknown short man run up, pick up a crossbow and shoot Chloe in the 
back. The bolt passed through her with an explosion of blood. Chloe fell without a sound. 

 The black mare galloped up to the revolving gate and threw back its head. And it 
jumped. It rose gracefully and flew above the gate, extending its front legs and glided like a 
black velvet line. The hind hooves did not even brush the upper beam. 

'Gods!' Dacre Silifant shouted. 'By the gods, what a horse! Worth its weight in gold!' 

'The mare for anyone who catches her!' Skellen cried. 'To the horses! To the horses and 
the chase!' 

When the gate was finally open, the pursuers galloped from the village, dust rising behind 
them. Ahead raced Bonhart and Boreas Mun. 

Kenna stood up with effort. She staggered and sat down heavily on the sand. Her feet 
tingled painfully. 

Cabernik Turnet was not moving, lying in a pool of blood with his legs and arms wide 
apart. Andres Vierny was trying to stand and Stigward was still unconscious. 

Collapsed on the sand, Chloe Stitz looked like a small child. 

Ola Harsheim and Bert Brigden brought before Skellen the short man who had killed 
Chloe. The Owl sighed. And shook with rage. From a shoulder strap across his chest he 
pulled off a second metal star, like the one her had thrown at the girl's face a moment before. 


'Go to hell, Skellen,' said the short man. Kenna finally remembered his name. Mekesser. 
Jediah Mekesser, the Gemmerian. She had met him in Rocayne. 

The Owl stooped, and violently waved his hand. The six-pointed star howled through the 
air and stuck deep into the face of Mekesser, between the eyes and nose. He did not even 
scream, just began to tremble spasmodically between the embrace of Harsheim and Brigden. 
He trembled for a long time and his bared teeth were so ghastly that everyone turned their 
heads. All except the Owl. 

'Make sure you retrieve my Orion,' Skellen said with a wave of his hand, after the body 
finally hung lifeless in the arms that held him. 'And throw the carrion in the manure, along 
with the other carrion, the hermaphrodite. Let there be no more trace of these disgusting 
traitors.' 

Suddenly the wind howled, and the clouds rushed overhead. Suddenly it was very dark. 

 

*** 

 

The guard was changed on the walls of the citadel. The Scarra sisters were a snoring duet. 
Kohout pisses noisily into an empty bucket. 

Kenna pulled the blanket up to her chin. 

 

*** 

 

They did not find the girl. She had disappeared. She had just disappeared. Boreas Mun – 
incredibly – lost track of the mare after three miles. Suddenly, without warning, it grew dark; 
the wind bent the trees nearly to the ground. It burst into rain, the thunder roared and the 
lightning flashed. 

Bonhart did not give up. They returned to Unicorn. They screamed at each other – 
Bonhart, The Owl, Rience and the fourth mysterious, scratchy, inhuman voice. They had the 
whole gang in the saddle; the only people who remained were those unable to ride – like me. 
They took with them peasants with torches, who knew the surrounding forests. They returned 
at dawn. 

They came back with nothing. Discounting the horror they had in their eyes. 

The rumours, Kenna remembered, only started a few days later. At first everyone was 
afraid of The Owl and Bonhart. They were so mad that it was better to stay out of their way. 
Even a careless word from Bert Brigden, an officer, earned him a blow from Skellen's whip. 


But then he talked about what happened during the chase. The small straw unicorn suddenly 
grew to the size of a dragon and frightened the horses so that the riders fell to the ground, it 
was only by a miracle that they did not break their necks. Across the sky galloped a fiery 
cavalcade of skeletal ghosts mounted on skeletal horses and at their head rode the terrible 
king who ordered his servants to erase the traces of the hooves of the black mare with their 
ragged cloaks. A macabre choir of nightjars cried a blood chilling song. And they heard the 
terrifying howls of a ghostly Beann'shie, the messenger of death... 

The wind, rain, clouds, trees and bushes in the darkness and the mysterious events, 
Boreas Mun spoke of, who was also there, with fear in his eyes. That was the whole story. 
And the nightjars? The nightjars, he added were always screaming. 

And the trail, the trail of hoof prints that suddenly disappeared, as if the horse had taken 
flight? 

The face of Boreas Mun, a tracker, who could trace a fish through water, stiffened at this 
question. The wind was responsible; the wind blew away all traces in the sand and leaves. 
There is no other explanation. 

Some even believed him, Kenna recalled. 

Some even believed that it was all a natural phenomenon or delusions. And even I 
laughed at them. 

But I stopped laughing. After Dun Dare. After Dun Dare no one laughed again. 

 

*** 

 

When he saw her, he drew back in fright and inhaled sharply. 

She had mixed with goose fat, soot from the fire place, making a thick mass which see 
used to blacken her eye sockets and eyelids, extending the lines out across her temples and to 
her ears. 

She looked like a demon. 

'From the fourth island along the banks go into the swamp forest,' he repeated the 
instructions. 'Then follow the river to the three dead trees, thence by the willow trees directly 
to the west. When the pines appear, along their edge is a river. You turn at the ninth fork and 
follow until it doesn't twist anymore. After that you will be at village of Dun Dare, to the 
north there are cottages. Right behind them, at the crossroads, is a tavern.' 

'I remember. I'll find it, don't worry.' 


'Especially be careful at the bends in the river. Beware the places where the reeds are less 
frequent. Or places overgrown with knotweed. And if you are caught out there at dusk before 
the pine trees, stop and camp until dawn. You must not at any cost ride through the swamp at 
night. It's almost the new moon and in addition there are clouds...' 

'I know.' 

'When you come to lake country... head north through the hills. Avoid the main roads, 
they be full of traffic from the armies. You will then arrive at a river, a large river, which is 
called the Sylte, you'll be halfway there.' 

'I know, you drew me a map.' 

'Oh, you're right. I forgot.' 

Ciri checked her saddlebags several times. Mechanically. She did not know what to say, 
in order to delay what had to be said. 

'I am glad that I met you,' he said before she could. 'Truly. Goodbye, witcheress' 

'Goodbye, hermit. Thank you for everything.' 

She was sitting in her saddle and about to spur Kelpie, when he came over and grabbed 
her hand. 

'Ciri. Stay. Wait for winter to pass...' 

'I'll get to the lake before the frost. And then, if you were right, I do not have to worry 
about winter. I'll be teleported to Thanedd. To the school of Aretuza to Lady Rita... 
Vysogota... How much time does it...' 

'The Tower of the Swallow is a legend. Remember. Only a legend.' 

'I too am only a legend,' she said bitterly. 'From birth. Zireael, Swallow, child surprise. 
The chosen one. Child of destiny. Child of the Elder Blood. I have to go, Vysogota. Be in 
good health.' 

'Be in good health, Ciri.' 

 

*** 

 

The tavern at the crossroads behind the village was empty. Cyprian Fripp the Younger 
and his three companions had refused access to the frightened locals and travellers. They, 
however, feasted and drank for days, sitting in the cold room full of smoke, which smelled 
like the usual stink that taverns got in winter when the windows and doors do not get opened 
– sweat, cats, mice, shoes, pine, birch, fat, ash, wet clothes and steaming vapour. 


'What shitty service,' Yuz Jannowitz repeated for perhaps the hundredth time, making a 
sign to the servants to bring more vodka. 'The plague on the Owl, leaving us in this shitty 
town! Better to be out on patrol in the woods!' 

'Come on you're not stupid,' Dede Vargas replied. 'Out there it is cold as ice! I prefer the 
warmth. And the girls!' 

He patted a serving girl on the buttock with a vengeance. The girl shrieked, not too 
convincingly and with distinct apathy. The work at the inn had taught her that if they patted 
or pinched you, you had to shriek. The guests loved it. 

Since the second day of being there, Cyprian Fripp and his companions had grabbed the 
two serving girls. The innkeeper was too afraid to protest and the girls were too tired to think 
of protesting. Life had taught them that if a girl protests, then they beat her. Therefore it was 
wiser to wait until they grew bored. 

'It's that fucking Falka,' said Rispat la Pointe continuing another topic from their boring 
evening talks, 'she is dead somewhere in the woods, I tell you. I saw Skellen's Orion slice 
open her face and the blood spurted out like a fountain! She could not have survived that.' 

'The Owl failed,' said Yuz Jannowitz. 'He only grazed her with the Orion. True, he did 
her mug a little damage. But, does that hinder a girl who can jump over a palisade? Did she 
fall from the horse? Shit! When we measured the palisade it was seven feet and two inches 
high! And she jumped it! And between the saddle and her ass you could not have gotten the 
blade of a knife.' 

'Blood flowed from her like a stuck pig,' protested Rispat la Pointe. 'She rode and fell off 
and died in a ravine, wolves have eaten the meat and crows and ants have stripped the bones 
clean from what was left of the carcass. Finally, Deireádh. So here we are and rotting away 
waiting for our money. And it is because they cannot find that bitch!' 

'It cannot be because a corpse doesn't not leave a trace or a mark,' Dede Vargas said with 
conviction. 'There is always something, a skull, pelvis. Rience, the sorcerer, will find the 
remains of Falka. Then that will be the end.' 

'And then we can leave this fucking dump,' Cyprian Fripp the Younger said, his gaze 
boring into the wall of the tavern, which he knew every nail and stain, 'and this fucking 
liquor. And both of these wenches, who reek of onions and when you fuck them they are as 
still as a rock, and stare at the ceiling and pick their teeth.' 

'Anything is better than boredom,' Yuz Jannowitz decreed. 'I want to howl! Shit, I want 
to do something! Anything! Let's set fire to the village, at least there will be something to 
do!' 

The door creaked. The sound was so unexpected that everyone jumped from their seats. 

'Out!' roared Vargas, 'Get out, old man! Stinking beggar! Go into the yard!' 


'Leave him alone,' Fripp waved his hand, bored. 'Hey, he is dragging bagpipes with him. 
He's probably an old veteran; old soldiers play it safe by playing and singing in taverns later 
in life. It's cold out in the yard. Let him sit here in the warmth...' 

'But far from us,' Jannowitz showed the old man where he could sit. 'We are already 
besieged by lice. I can see them slowly crawling around all over the place. Anyone would 
think there are turtles not lice.' 

'Innkeeper!' Fripp called out imperiously. 'Bring the old man something to eat! And our 
spirits!' 

The old man removed his big fur hat and gracefully nodded his head. 

'Thank you, gentlemen,' he said. 'But today is the holiday of Saovine. The holiday does 
not lend with one being driven into the rain and freezing muck. The festival agrees to treat...' 

'It's true,' Rispat la Pointe slapped his forehead. 'Today is indeed the holiday of Saovine! 
The end of October!' 

'It is a night of monsters,' the innkeeper had brought the old man some water soup. 'A 
night of spirits and ghosts!' 

'Ha ha!' Yuz Jannowitz said. 'The old man will regale us with a tale of old!' 

'Let him,' Dede Vargas yawned. 'Anything is better than this boredom!' 

'Saovine,' Cyprian Fripp said. 'It's been five weeks since Unicorn. And two weeks of us 
just sitting here. Two whole weeks! Saovine, ha!' 

'A night of monsters,' the old man licked the spoon, he poke around in the bowl with his 
finger, then pulled it out and popped it in his mouth. 'A night of ghosts and witchcraft!' 

'What did I tell you?' Yuz Jannowitz smiled. 'We will have old wife's tales!' 

The old man scratched and hiccupped. 

'The feast of Saovine,' he began emphatically, 'is the last night before the November new 
moon, and for the elves is the last night of the old year. When the new day dawns, it is New 
Year's for the elves. So there is a custom among the elves that on Saovine night to light all 
the fires around the house and one pitch torch which they will save the remains of, and that 
same torch will be lit again at Belleteyn. And it is not just the elves that do this, but even 
some of ours, to keep them well and protect them from evil spirits...' 

'Spirits!' Yuz snorted. 'Listen to what this fool is saying!' 

'This is the night of Saovine!' the old man said with a passionate voice. 'On this night 
spirits walk the earth! The spirits of the dead knocking on the windows, 'Let us in', they 
moan! It is good to give them porridge with honey; you can also sprinkle it with vodka...' 


'Vodka you'd keep for yourself and sprinkle down your throat,' chortled Rispat la Pointe. 
'And your spirits can kiss my ass!' 

'Oh, good sirs, please do not make fun of the spirits, because they have a keen sense of 
hearing and are vindictive! It is Saovine night! Listen, can you hear sounds and knocking? 
They are the dead who come from another world; they want to sneak in and warm themselves 
by the fire and eat their fill. There out in the bare woods, with the freezing wind, they will be 
pulled towards houses, where there is fire and heat. And do not forget to put food in a bowl 
on the threshold, or in the barn, because if they find nothing to eat, they can after midnight, 
enter the house...' 

'Oh, gods!' one of the girls on duty whispered, then cried loudly because Fripp had 
pinched her on the bottom. 

'Not a bad story!' Fripp said. 'But still too far away to be good! Innkeeper, pour the old 
man a mug of mulled wine, maybe he can accomplish a better tale. A good fable about 
ghosts, boys, because the girls are listening to them and not serving!' 

The men laughed when they heard the shrieks of the girls, who were listening in. The old 
man took a sip of warm wine, making lots of noise and belching. 

'Do not over indulge and fall asleep!' Vargas warned him menacingly. 'You are here to 
entertain! Tell tales, sing and blow on the bagpipes! Be merry!' 

The old man opened his mouth, in which a single tooth appeared like a milestone in an 
open field. 

'But good sirs, today is Saovine! What would I play? The music of Saovine is the rustling 
of the wind on the window! The howling of werewolves and vampires, and the groaning of 
ghouls! Beann'shie call and moan and whoever hears it, is insured an early death. All evil 
spirits leave their dens, witches fly to the last conclave before winter! Saovine is a night for 
spirits, monsters and ghosts! Do not enter the forest, because it will devour you! Do not enter 
a cemetery, because the dead will walk! And it is best not to leave your home and to be sure, 
hang a new iron knife over the threshold, and evil will not dare cross it. Mother should keep 
children close on Saovine night because a human baby can easily be grabbed by a rusalka or 
they may turn them into a mutant. And a woman who is pregnant best not go outside lest the 
evil eye see her and will take the baby from the womb! Instead of a child she will bear a 
striga born with iron teeth...' 

'Oh gods!' 

'With iron teeth. First it eats the mother's breast. Afterwards it eats her hands. Then it 
eats her face... Oh, I'm also hungry...' 

'Take this bone, there is still meat on it. You need to eat more in your old age or you'll 
get unhealthy, ha, ha! And you girl, give us more vodka. Come on, old man; tell us more 
ghost stories!' 


'Saovine, good sirs, is the last night when ghosts can fly through our world and try and 
remove the cold from their bones... Later they descend into hell, into the ground, where it is 
always winter. Therefore, from Saovine until February, when Imbaelk is celebrated is the 
most convenient time to look in scary places for treasures. If, for example in the warm season 
someone began digging in a mound, they would awaken two or three wights, who would 
jump up and eat the treasure hunter. But between Saovine and Imbaelk it is safe to dig as 
much as you please, because the wights will sleep like an old bear.' 

'The things that the old fart invents!' 

'It is true, good sirs. Yes, Saovine night is terrible and yet it is magical and best for all 
sorts of predictions and prophecies. On such a night it is best to read from the palm or turn 
the cards or see omens like the white rooster, onion, cheese or rabbit intestines or a dead 
bat...' 

'Bah!' 

'On the night of Saovine, the night of terrors and phantoms... It is best to stay at home... 
around the fire. With the whole family...' 

'The whole family,' Fripp the Younger repeated the last words and grinned at his 
companions. 'The whole family, you heard? Along with list, that makes a week of knowing 
where people are cunningly concealing themselves!' 

'The blacksmith's wife!' Yuz guess immediately. 'The local beauty! Beware you head, 
Fripp. Today you were almost caught in her house. So what, lads? Do we go to the 
blacksmith's home?' 

'Maybe soon,' Dede Vargas drawled. 'Before my eyes, upon reaching the village, she 
was bouncing those tits and shaking that ass... I went for her, but that idiot Dacre Silifant got 
the jump on me... Well Silifant is far away and the blacksmith's wife sits at home! What are 
we waiting for?' 

'We have already killed the mayor of this village,' Rispat raised his eyebrows, 'We beat 
the bastard who came to his defence. How many more deaths do we need? The blacksmith 
and his son are brawny as oaks. They do not fear us. We will have to...' 

'Hurt them,' Fripp calmly finished. 'Just hurt them a little, nothing more. We will finish 
our drinks and go into the village to celebrate Saovine! Let's find a sheepskin and cover 
ourselves and go down there roaring. The yokels will think we are devils or wights!' 

'Do we bring the blacksmiths wife back to our rooms, or do we do as in my land, 
Gemmera, and do it before the eyes of the family?' 

'One does not forget that,' said Fripp, the young man looked out through the window into 
the night. 'Shit, that is a strong wind. Even the poplars are bending!' 


'Oh, ho, ho!' said the old man from behind a pitcher. 'That is no ordinary wind, sir. 
Witches fly through the air on their broomsticks to coven meetings, seeding the air behind 
them with potions from their mortars to clean away tracks. There is no escape for a man who 
gets caught by them in the forest!' 

'Go frighten the children with our tales, old man!' 

'Do not mock me, sir, in this evil hour. Let me tell you that the worst witches, come from 
countesses and princesses, do not ride on broomsticks, no! Those ride on their black cats!' 

'Ha, ha, ha, ha!' 

'It is true! Because Saovine is the only night of the year when cats can become mares as 
black as pitch. And woe to him who in the night black as pitch hears the pounding of hooves 
and sees the witch on her black mare. Whoever the witch finds will not escape death. She 
spins around him like a leaf blowing in the wind and pulls him to hell!' 

'I'm beginning to like this story, finish it when we get back! When we return here we will 
party! We'll dance here and fuck the blacksmith's wife... What is it Rispat?' 

Rispat la Pointe, who had left to go into the yard to relieve his bladder, ran back inside, 
his face as white as snow. He was gesticulation wildly, pointing to the door. He failed to utter 
a word. And it was not necessary. From outside can the sound of a horse neighing. 

'A black mare,' Fripp said, his face almost touching the window glass. 'The same black 
mare. It's her.' 

'The witch?' 

'Falka, you idiot.' 

'It's her spirit!' Rispat gasped. 'A ghost! She could not have survived! She has died and 
come back as a ghost! On the night of Saovine.' 

'She will come in the night black as pitch,' muttered the old man, clutching his empty 
glass to his stomach. 'And those who she sees will not escape death...' 

'To arms, to arms!' Fripp said feverishly. 'Quickly! Cover the door, on both sides! 
Fortune smiles! Falka doesn't know we are here and has come to warm up, the cold and 
hunger have driven her out of hiding! Right into our hands! The Owl and Rience will shower 
us in gold! Grab a weapon...' 

The door creaked. 

The old man leaned over the table top, his eyes narrowed. He saw badly. His eyes were 
tired, ruined by glaucoma and chronic conjunctivitis. In addition, the tavern was dark and 
smoky. Therefore, he didn't see the slim figure that came into to the room from the porch, 
wearing a leather jacket trimmed in musk, with a hood and scarf hiding her face. Instead the 
old man had a good ear. He heard the muffled cry of one of the serving girls, the clatter of 


boots and the innkeeper cursing in a low voice, He could hear the clinking of swords in their 
sheaths. And the quiet, scathing voice of Cyprian Fripp. 

'We have you now, Falka! You were not expecting us here, huh?' 

'I was expecting you,' the old man heard. He trembled at the sound of that voice. 

He saw the movement of the slender figure. He heard a gasp of horror. The muffled cry of 
one of the serving girls. He could not see that the girl called Falka had removed the hood and 
scarf. He could not see that her face was terribly maimed. And her eyes painted with paste of 
fat and soot made it seem like she had the eyes of a demon. 

'I'm not Falka,' said the girl. The old man saw her move again, fast and blurred. He saw 
something glint in the light of the oil lamps. 'I'm Ciri from Kaer Morhen. I'm a witcher. I 
came here to kill.' 

The old man, who in his life had experience more than one tavern brawl, had developed a 
method to avoid injury; by diving under the table, shrink down as much as you can and hold 
onto the table legs. From that position, obviously you could not see anything. Nor did he 
want to. He held tightly to the table, even when the table was thrown across the room along 
with other bits of furniture. All around him clattered heavy boots and echoing command, 
shouts, insults and the blows of heavy steel. 

A serving girl screamed shrilly, incessantly, without stopping. 

Someone rolled onto the table, moving the piece of furniture along with the old man 
clinging to it, and fell down beside him. The old man shouted to feel warm blood splash him. 
Dede Vargas, the man who at first wanted to kick him out, the old man recognised him by the 
brass buttons on his jacket, screamed gruesomely, thrashing about, spurting blood, and 
banging his hands around him. One of the random blows caught the old man straight in the 
eye. The old man ceased to see anything. The serving girl, who was screaming gasped, fell 
silent, took a breath and began to scream again, in an even higher pitch. 

Someone fell heavily onto the ground, again splashing blood on the newly scrubbed pine 
floorboards. The old man did not know that the man who had died now, was Rispat la Pointe, 
Ciri had cut him in the side of the neck. He could not see as Ciri a pirouette right in front of 
Jannowitz and Fripp, and was ripping through their guard like a shadow or grey smoke. 
Jannowitz jumped after her like a quick cat. He was a skilled swordsman. Securely standing 
on his right foot, he attacked with his long reach, directly for the girl's face, right at the ugly 
scar. He had to hit. 

He missed. 

He failed to protect himself. She slashed at him closely, with both hands across the chest 
and abdomen. She jumped back, turned and all the while evaded the slashes of Fripp, she 
slashed at Jannowitz neck. Jannowitz collapsed with his head falling back. Fripp stepped over 
the dead man, and launched a quick slash. Ciri blocked it, make a half pirouette and gave him 


a short cut on his thigh. Fripp staggered and stumble into the table, losing his balance he 
instinctively held out his hand. When his hand was on the table, Ciri, with a quick blow, cut it 
off. 

Fripp raised the bloody stump, looked at it carefully, and then looked at the hand that was 
on the table, and collapsed suddenly, violently and landed hard on him bottom on the ground, 
just as if he had slipped on soap. Once seated he began to howl, a sharp, piercing howl like a 
wild wolf. 

Crouched under the table, covered with blood, the old man listened for a moment to the 
ghostly duet – the screaming serving girl and Fripp howling uncontrollably. 

The girl was silent first, finishing her inhuman screams with a shriek. Fripp merely fell 
silent. 

'Mother,' he said suddenly, very clearly and fully conscious. 'Mama... What is... what 
... what happened to me? What I... is?' 

'You're dying,' said the girl with the maimed face. 

The old man's hair stood on end, the little that was left. To stop his trembling he clenched 
his teeth on his sleeve. 

Cyprian Fripp the Younger uttered a sound as if swallowing with difficult. Then he made 
no more noise. None. 

There was absolute silence. 

'What have you done...' groaned the innkeeper in the silence that followed. 'What did 
you do, girl...' 

'I'm a witcher. I kill monsters' 

'We'll hang... They'll burn down the town and the inn!' 

'I kill monsters,' she repeated, her voice suddenly changing to something like 
amazement. 

The innkeeper groaned, and sobbed. The old man slowly got out from under his hiding 
place under the table. He moved to avoid the body of Dede Vargas with the horrible slashed 
face. 

'You ride a black mare...' he muttered. 'At night in pitch dark... removing the tracks 
behind you...' 

 The girl turned to look at him. She had had time to cover her face with her scarf, and her 
eyes, surrounded by glossy black circles watched him. 

'Those you see,' stammered the old man, 'will not escape death... Because you are death 
itself.' 


The girl looked at him. For a long time. And quite indifferent. 

'You're right,' she finally said. 

 

*** 

 

Somewhere in the swamps, far away, buy much closer than before, sounded the plaintive 
howl of a Beann'shie. 

Vysogota lay on the ground, on which he had fallen while getting out of bed. He 
confirmed with horror that he could not get up. His heart beat up in his throat, strangling him. 

 He knew who's death the cry of the elven spirit announced. Life was beautiful, he 
thought. In spite of everything. 

'Gods...' he whispered. 'I know I don't believe in you... But, if you exist...' 

A monstrous pain suddenly exploded in his chest under his breastbone. 

Back in the swamps, far away, but much closer that before; the Beann'shie screamed a 
third time. 

'If you exist, protect the witcheress on her journey!' 

 

*** 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


'I have such big eyes the better to see you,' growled the Wolf resolutely. 'I have such big 
hands to better grab you and embrace you! With me everything is big, I will thoroughly 
convince you of that soon. Why are you looking at me so strangely, little girl? Why do not you 
answer?' 

The sorceress smiled. 'I have a surprise for you.' 

 

Flourens Delannoy 

'The Surprise' from Fairy Tales and Folk Stories 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


