Chapter Ten 
 
 
The man stealthily approaching the camp was very clever and cunning. His position 
changed quickly and he moved silently and swiftly so that his approach would not be noticed 
by anyone. Anyone but Boreas Mun. Boreas was very skilful in approaching manoeuvres. 
'Show yourself, stranger,' he called, making sure to make his voice sound confident and 
bold. 'Your tricks won't work on me. I can see you out there!' 
One of the boulders on the hillside against the starry sky moved and turned into the 
silhouette of a human figure. 
Boreas turned the spit roast as the meat was burning. Pretending to comfortably support 
himself, he put his hand on the handle of his bow. 
'My property is not worth much,' he said in a calm tone with a thread of warning. 'I only 
have a few things, but I do not intend to lose them. I will defend them to the death.' 
'I'm not a thief,' said the deep voice of the man hiding among the rocks. 'I am a pilgrim.' 
The pilgrim was tall and robust, measuring about seven feet and Boreas noticed quite the 
stomach on him. He held a cane in his hand that was a thick as a pole carts and looked like an 
ordinary pilgrim stick. Boreas Mun wondered how suck a big, hulking man could move with 
such agility. 
He became concerned. His bow, a composite bow with seventy pounds of pressure, which 
could dispatch an elk at a hundred paces, suddenly seemed like a fragile child's toy. 
'I am a pilgrim,' the figure repeated. 'I have no evil...' 
'The other one,' Boreas interrupted sharply, 'can come out too!' 
'What other...' the pilgrim stuttered and stopped, seeing from the darkness on the 
opposite side of the fire, emerge a slim, noiseless shadow. 
This time Boreas Mun was surprised. The other man was an elf – his expert trackers eye 
detected it right away by the way he moved. And being surprised by an elf had no shame. 
'I apologise,' the elf said, his voice slightly hoarse. 'I did not hide from the two of you 
out of malice, but out of caution. Um, I'd recommend you turn the spit a bit.' 
'He's right,' said the stranger, leaning on his cane and sniffing audibly. 'The way the 
meat smells, it's over done.' 
Boreas turned the spit, sighed, cleared his throat and sighed again. 
'Gentlemen, please sit down,' he said finally. 'Wait a few minutes and the roast will be 
done. I say, it is a knave who refuses hospitality to pilgrims on the road.' 
Grease dripped into the fire and the flame blazed brighter. The pilgrim whore a felt hat 
with a wide brim, which hid his face quite effectively in shadow. The elf wore around his 
head a colourful scarf, which did not hide his face. When they saw him in the firelight, the 
tracker and the pilgrim winced. They made no sound, just held their breaths at the sight of his 
face, which was once beautifully elven, but now was disfigured by an ugly scar that ran 
diagonally across his forehead, brow, nose and cheek to chin. 
Boreas Mun grunted and turned the spit again. 
'The smell,' he did not ask, but made a statement of fact, 'is what attracted you to my 
camp.' 
'Indeed,' said the pilgrim with the hat, 'I don't want to brag, but I smelled your roast at 
quite a distance. But I kept a proper vigilance. The fire, that I approached yesterday, the 
ragged savages were roasting a woman.' 
'That is true,' said the elf. 'The next morning I found human bones in the ashes.' 
'The next morning?' the tall pilgrim repeated. 
'How long have you been following in my footsteps, my Lord elf?' 
'A long time.' 

'What kept you from revealing your presence?' 
'Caution.' 
'The Elskerdeg Pass,' Boreas Mun said turning the spit and breaking the awkward silence, 
'does not enjoy the best reputation. I have also seen bones in fires, corpses on stakes and 
hanging from trees. In the surrounding mountains are hidden outlaws, outcasts and the 
followers of perverted cults. And creatures who only see a man by himself as food. 
Supposedly.' 
'Not supposedly,' said the elf. 'Definitely. And the further east you go into the mountains, 
the worse it gets.' 
'Are you also headed east? For Elskerdeg? To Zerrikania? Or even further, to Haakland?' 
Neither the pilgrim or the elf answered. Boreas Mun didn't really expect one. First, the 
question was indiscreet. Second, it was stupid. From where they were standing it was only 
possible to head east. Through the Elskerdeg Pass. Where he was headed. 
'The roast is ready,' Boreas, with a deft movement, which was also intended as a warning, 
flicked open a butterfly knife. 'Come, gentlemen, don't be shy.' 
The pilgrim took out a hunting knife and the elf a stiletto which was by no means a 
kitchen implement. All three, however, used their blades to cut the food. For some time all 
that could be heard was the crunch and crackle of eating and the sizzle of bones thrown into 
the fire. 
The pilgrim belched dignified. 
'Interesting animal,' the pilgrim said, looking at the shoulder that he had just cleaned as if 
he had spent three days in an anthill. 'The taste reminds me of lamb, but it was a tender as a 
rabbit... I do not remember ever having eaten anything like it before.' 
'That was a skrekk,' the elf said while crushing a bone between his teeth. 'But it does not 
resemble anything I have ever eaten.' 
Boreas quietly cleared his throat. The barely perceptible undercurrent of amusement in 
the elf's voice proved that he knew that he was eating a huge mountain rat, with blood red 
eyes and sharp incisors, whose tail measured one and a half cubits. The tracker was not going 
to catch the giant rodent, but shot it in self-defence. He then, however, decided to roast it. 
He was a wise man, the thought coldly. He never would have eaten a rat that fed on 
garbage and waste. But the nearest community to the Elskerdeg Pass that was able to produce 
waste was over three hundred miles away. The rat - or the skrekk as the elf had called it - has 
been clean and healthy. It had no contact with civilization. Therefore it had not been dirty or 
carrying disease. 
Finally they finished the last of the meat, the ribs and bones went into the fire. The moon 
rose over the jagged peaks of the mountains. The wind fanned the flames and sparks flew, 
they would die off between the myriad of twinkling stars. 
 'Have you gentlemen been on the road long?' Boreas Mun allowed himself another 
indiscreet question. 'How long since you went through the Solveig Gate?' 
'Long ago, or recently,' said the pilgrim. 'What does it matter? I passed through Solveig 
two days after September's full moon.' 
'For me it has been six days,' said the elf. 
'Ha,' the tracker said, emboldened by their answers. 'I'm surprised that we did not met 
there, Because I was passing through at the same time. But I was on a horse.' 
He paused, quenching gloomy thoughts and memories of his horse and its loss. He was 
sure that his casual companions had similar adventures. They could not have travelled the 
whole way on foot to catch him here in the vicinity of Elskerdeg. 
'I gather,' he continued, 'that you gentlemen started travelling just after the war and after 
the conclusion of the peace of Cintra. Naturally, I don't care, but I dare to presume that you, 
gentlemen were not satisfied with the order of things established at Cintra.' 

Silence reigned for a long time around the fire but was eventually broken by the distant 
howl. A wolf, probably, although around the Elskerdeg Pass you could never be sure of 
anything. 
'To be honest,' the elf said unexpectedly, 'I found after the peace of Cintra there was no 
reason why the world should love me. Or me the new layout.' 
'My own case,' said the pilgrim, crossing his arms over his powerful chest. 'was the 
same. Although I learned of it, as a friend of mine says, post factum.' 
There was a long silence. The howling had ceased in the pass. 
'In the beginning,' continued the pilgrim, although Boreas and the elf were convinced 
that he would not, 'everything pointed to the fact that the peace of Cintra would bring 
changes for the better and set tolerable living conditions for this world. If not for all, at least 
for some...' 
'The kings,' grunted Boreas, 'travelled to Cintra in April, if I recall.' 
'Exactly, April second,' said the pilgrim. 'I remember it was the new moon.' 
 
*** 
 
Along the entire wall located under dark beams within a gallery, hung a row of shields 
with the colourful figures of heraldic emblems and the coats of arms of the nobility of Cintra. 
One glance was enough to detect the difference between the old faded coats of arms of the 
nobility of Cintra and the newly promoted families from the reign of Dagorad and Calanthe. 
The latter had vibrant colours which had not yet faded and you could not detect the slightest 
sign of woodworm. 
However, the most intense colours appeared on the shield that had been put up most 
recently, those with the coat of arms of the Nilfgaardian nobles. Those who had distinguished 
themselves during the conquest of the country and had proven themselves during the five-
year imperial administration. 
Once we again hold Cintra, thought King Foltest, we will need to ensure that these coat 
of arms are not destroyed in a fervour of restoration. Politics is one thing, aesthetics another. 
Changes to a regime do not justify vandalism. 
So this is where it all began, thought Dijkstra, looking around the large hall. The famous 
engagement feast, during which appeared an iron hedgehog demanding Princess Pavetta's 
hand... And Queen Calanthe hired a witcher... 
How amazing are the interwoven fates of humans, thought the spy, surprised by the banality of his own thoughts. 
It's been five years, thought Queen Meve. Five years ago, the blood and brains of Calanthe, the Lioness of Cintra, exploded on the flagstones of that courtyard, which I can see through this window. Calanthe whose portrait we saw proudly hanging in the foyer, the last 
of the royal bloodline. After her daughter, Pavetta drowned, she was left with only her granddaughter Cirilla. And if it is true that Cirilla also died... 
'Please,' Cyrus Engelkind Hemmelfart the hierarch of Novigrad, waved his trembling hand, by virtue of his age, position and widespread respect he was to preside over the discussions. "To your places please."
They sat at a round table, where the seats were identified by mahogany tablets. Meve, Queen of Rivia and Lyria. Foltest, King of Temeria and his vassal, King Venzlav of Brugge. Demavend, King of Aedirn. Henselt, King of Kaedwen. Ethan, King of Cidaris. The young King Kistrin of Verden. The Duke Nitert, head of the regency council of Redania. And the Earl Dijkstra. 
We should seek to get rid of this spy and remove him from the table of discussions, thought the hierarch. King Henselt and King Foltest, and even young King Kistrin, have already allowed themselves a few sour comments to our Nilfgaardian representatives. This Sigismund Dijkstra is a person of dubious origins with an unacceptable past and reputation. We cannot afford to have such a person distorting the atmosphere of the deliberations. 
The head of the Nilfgaardian delegation, Baron Shilard Fitz-Oesterlen, who sat at the round table directly opposite Dijkstra, greeted the spy with a curt diplomatic bow. Seeing that everyone was already seated, the hierarch of Novigrad also sat. Not without the help of a few 
pages that held his trembling hands. The hierarch sat on a chair made years ago for Queen Calanthe. The chair had a beautifully carved backing, towering over the other chairs. 
Even though this was a round table, it was known who was the boss. 

*** 
 
So it was here, thought Triss Merigold, looking around the room, looking at the tapestries, 
painting and numerous hunting trophies. Here in this room, after the devastation of the throne 
room, a memorable conversation took place between Calanthe, the witcher, Pavetta and an 
enchanted hedgehog. Here the Queen agreed to a strange marriage. After all, the princess 
was already pregnant and Ciri was born less than eight months later... Ciri, the heiress to the 
throne, the young lion with the Lioness's blood... Ciri, my little sister. Who is now apparently 
far away to the south. Fortunately, no longer alone, she is with Geralt and Yennefer. She's 
safe. 
Unless they have lied to me again. 
'Take a seat, ladies,' Philippa Eilhart said, who Triss had been watching suspiciously for 
some time. 'The sovereigns of the world will in a moment begin to recite their inaugural 
speeches. I would not want us to miss a single word.' 
The sorceresses, interrupting their gossip and quickly took their seats. Sile de Tansarville, 
wore a silver boa, a feminine accent to her austere black outfit. Assire var Anahid was 
dressed in a violet silk dress, which was graceful and combined simplicity and modest 
elegance. Francesca Findabair was majestic as ever. Ida Emean aep Sivney was mysterious as 
usual. Margarita Laux-Antille was dignified and serious. Sabrina Glevissig was adorned with 
turquoise. Keira Metz was dressed in green and lemon yellow. And Fringilla Vigo. 
Depressed, sad, pale, morbid and with a literal corpse-like pallor. 
Triss sat next to Keira and opposite Fringilla. On the wall behind the Nilfgaardian witch 
was a picture of a rider galloping down an alley of alders. The trees limbs reached towards 
the rider and their black cavities that served as mouths laughed. Triss shivered involuntary. 
Set in the middle of the table was a telecommunicator. Philippa, with a spell, adjusted the 
image and sound. 
'As you can see and hear,' she said somewhat bitterly, 'in Cintra's throne room, just 
below us, on the ground floor, the sovereigns of the world are about to decide its fate. And 
we, here, one floor above them, will watch to make sure they don't make a mistake.' 
 
*** 
 
The howling in the pass was joined by other voices. Now Boreas had no doubt, they were 
certainly wolves. 
'I too,' he said, trying to encourage more conversation, 'did not expect much from these 
negotiations in Cintra. The truth is that no one I know counted on these negotiations bringing 
anything good.' 
'The important thing was,' said the pilgrim, 'that the negotiations had begun. The 
common man, for that's what I consider myself to be, were well aware that the warring kings 
and emperor would destroy each other if they could, relentlessly. To stop the killing and sit 

down around the table. It meant that they no longer had the strength. They were, simply 
speaking, powerless. And that powerlessness meant that no soldiers would kill the common 
man, burn his house, kill his children raped his women or sell his whole family into slavery. 
No, instead they gathered in Cintra and negotiate. Let us rejoice!' 
The elf looked up from the burning logs which he was prodding with a stick. 
'Even the common man,' he said with obvious sarcasm, 'even in his moments of joy, 
should know that politics is also a war, only by other means. It should also be understood that 
such negotiations are merely a form of trade. It is conducted in an identical manner. Success 
in negotiation is based on concessions obtained. Something is given, something is lost. In 
other words, in order to buy something, something must be sold.' 
'Indeed,' the pilgrim said after a moment, 'Something so plain and obvious can be 
understood by even the simplest of men.' 
 
*** 
 
'No, no, a thousand times, no!' cried King Henselt, smashing his two fists into the 
tabletop, overturning his drink and making the inkwell jump. 'I will not hear any more 
discussions about it! No more haggling! No more, I say, deiraedh!' 
'Henselt,' Foltest said quietly in a conciliatory tone, 'don't hinder. And do not embarrass 
us by screaming in front of His Excellency.' 
Shilard Fitz-Oesterlen, the negotiator on behalf of the Empire of Nilfgaard, bowed with a 
false smile, that suggested that the antics of the King of Kaedwen did not irritate or ultimately 
interest him. 
'Are we going to start attacking each other,' continued Foltest, 'like a pack of rabid dogs? 
Shame on you, Henselt.' 
'We have made arrangements with Nilfgaard in the thorny matter of Dol Angra,' said 
Dijkstra. 'It would be foolish...' 
'I resent such comments!' roared Henselt so loud he could have competed with a buffalo. 
'I resent such rude comments, particularly from some fucking spy! I am the fucking anointed 
King!' 
'It can't be seen at first glance,' Meve muttered. 
Demavend, turned away from looking at the shields on the rooms walls, smiling with 
distain, as if not concerned about the future of his kingdom. 
'Enough!' wheezed Henselt, his eyes rolling. 'Enough, by the gods. As I said, I won't 
give up an inch of land. Not one, not a single claim! I do not agree to the depletion of my 
kingdom by even a span, not even half an inch of earth! The gods have entrusted me with 
Kaedwen and therefore I would only be willing to surrender it to the gods! The Lower 
Marches is my territory... It has for centuries...' 
'Upper Aedirn,' Dijkstra spoke again, 'has only been part of Kaedwen since last summer. 
More specifically, from the twenty-four of July last year. From the moment that Kaedwen 
sent in occupational forces.' 
'I ask,' said Shilard Fitz-Oesterlen, 'that it be recorded ad futuram rei memorian, that the 
Empire of Nilfgaard had nothing to do with this annexation.' 
'Except for at that time you were plundering Vengerberg.' 
'Nihil ad rem!' 
'Really?' 
'Gentlemen!' Foltest admonished. 
'The Kaedwen army,' fumed Henselt, 'entered the Lower Marches as liberators! My 
soldiers were greeted with flowers! My soldiers...' 

'Your bandits,' said Demavend calmly, but his face betrayed the effort it cost to stay 
calm. 'Your bandits invaded my kingdom, murdered, raped and looted. Lady and gentlemen, 
we are gathered here for a week to discuss the future of the world. By the gods, is it to be the 
face of crime and looting? Should it be maintained in the lawless status quo? Should stolen 
goods remain in the hands of thugs and robbers?' 
Henselt grabbed a map from the table, tore it in two and with a rapid movement threw it 
at Demavend. The King of Aedirn did not even move. 
'My armies,' Henselt spluttered, his face turning the colour of a well aged wine, 'won the 
Marches from the Nilfgaardians. Your pitiful reign at that time was already in the past, 
Demavend. You probably don't realise, but if not for my troops, you would not even be 
ruling today. I'd like to see how you'd drive the Black Ones back over the Yaruga without 
my help. Without exaggeration I can say that you are only a king because of my kindness. 
But now my kindness ends! I will not let my kingdom be depleted!' 
'Neither will I,' Demavend stood. 'We will never reach an agreement!' 
'Gentlemen,' said Cyrus the hierarch in a conciliatory tone, who until then had been 
dozing. 'No doubt, we can always reach some compromise...' 
'The Empire of Nilfgaard,' said Shilard, 'does not intend to accept any solution that 
would harm the country of the elves of Dol Blathanna. If necessary, My Lords, I will re-read 
the content of the memorandum...' 
Henselt, Foltest and Dijkstra snorted, but Demavend looked at the Imperial ambassador 
calmly, almost benevolently. 
'For the good of the people,' he said, 'and to maintain the peace, I acknowledge the 
autonomy of Dol Blathanna. But not as a kingdom, but as a duchy. The condition is that the 
Duchess Enid an Gleanna pay me homage, and is committed to the equality of elves and 
humans rights and privileges. I am willing to do this, pro bono.' 
'Here,' said Meve, 'are the words of a true king.' 
'Salus publica lex suprema est,' added hierarch Hemmelfart, who for some time had 
waited for the opportunity to boast of his knowledge of diplomatic vocabulary. 
'I would like to add, however,' Demavend continued, looking at the bloated Henselt, 'that 
Dol Blathanna's concession is not a precedent. This is the only breach of the integrity of my 
lands that I will accept. I will not recognise any additional distributions. The army of 
Kaedwen, which breached my boarders as an aggressor and occupier, has one week to leave 
the fortresses and castles that they have illegally occupied in Upper Aedirn. That is the 
condition for me to continue to take part in these negotiations. And verba volant, my 
secretary will add an official protocol in that sense.' 
'Henselt?' Foltest gave him a questioning look. 
'Never!' bellowed the King of Kaedwen, overturning his chair and jumping like a 
chimpanzee stung by a hornet. 'I will never give up the Marches! You'll have to go over my 
corpse! I will not give it up! Nothing can force me! Nothing! Over my dead body!' 
And to prove that he was a scholar he shouted. 
'Non possumus!' 
 
*** 
 
'I'll give him non possumus, the fool!' snapped Sabrina Glevissig in the chamber one 
floor above. 'Don't worry ladies, I'm going to make this stubborn fool surrender Upper 
Aedirn. His army will leave within ten days, it is clear. There is no question about it. If any of 
you ladies doubt this, I have a right to feel offended.' 
Philippa Eilhart and Sile de Tansarville expressed their appreciation by bowing. Assire 
var Anahid thanked her with a smile. 

'Let us return to the problem of Dol Blathanna,' said Sabrina. 'We know the content of 
the memorandum of Emperor Emhyr. The kings down there have not have time to thoroughly 
discuss this issue, but they have already hinted at their approaches. The king whose voice 
carries most interest, you might say, is King Demavend.' 
'Demavend's position,' Sile adjusted the fur boa around her neck, 'can be described as 
extremely helpful. I consider his position to be thoughtful and balanced. Shilard Fitz-
Oesterlen will be no small trouble trying to argue in the direction of greater concessions. I 
don't know whether it can be done.' 
'It will be,' said Assire var Anahid. 'Such are his instructions. The presentation of an 
official note will have them tangling for at least a day. After that time, he will begin to make 
concessions.' 
'That is the normal procedure,' said Sabrina. 'According to him, they want to meet in a 
separate negotiation and come to an agreement. That's what we expect. We'll decide how 
much we'll allow. Francesca! Speak! After all, this is about your country.' 
'That is why,' said the Daisy of the Valley with a smile, 'I am silent, Sabrina.' 
'Break your pride, please,' Margarita Laux-Antille asked seriously. We really need to 
know what we can allow the kings.' 
Francesca Findabair smiled more beautifully. 
'For the cause of peace and pro bon public,' she said. 'I agree with the proposal f King 
Demavend. From now on, my dear friends, you can stop titling me, Your Majesty, Your 
Grace will be enough.' 
'Elven jokes,' said Sabrina. 'I never laugh, probably because I don't understand them. 
What about Demavend's remaining requirements?' 
Francesca blinked. 
'I agree with the repatriation of the settlers and the restitution of their property,' she said 
gravely. 'I guarantee equal rights for all races...' 
'By the gods,' Philippa Eilhart laughed, 'don't be so accommodating! Submit your own 
terms!' 
'I will,' the elf suddenly turned serious. 'I will not pay tribute to the Aedirn king. I want 
Dol Blathanna to be a freehold. Without the bond of vassalage, beyond the pledge of 
allegiance and not to act against the sovereign.' 
'Demavend will not accept this,' Philippa said laconically. 'He will not give us the profits 
and revenues from the Valley of Flowers.' 
'On that issue,' Francesca raised her eyebrows, 'I am willing to engage in bilateral 
negotiations, I'm sure we can reach a consensus. A freehold is not required to pay tribute, but 
payment is not necessarily prohibited or excluded.' 
'And what about succession rights?' asked Philippa. 'What about the right of 
primogeniture? Agreeing to a freehold, Demavend will require guarantees of the indivisibility 
of the Principality.' 
'Demavend,' Francesca smiled again, 'may be fooled by my skin and figure, but you 
surprise me, Philippa. It has been a long, long time since I passed the age of being able to get 
pregnant. As far as birthrights and successions, Demavend has nothing to fear. I am the 
ultimus familiae of the royal house of Dol Blathanna. However, despite the age difference 
between me and Demavend, I will not be dealing with him, but his grandchildren's great-
grandchildren. I assure you, ladies that in this respect there are no disputes.' 
'In this, no,' said Assire var Anahid looking the elven sorceress in the eyes. 'But what 
about the Squirrels? What about the elves that fought on the side of the Empire? If I'm not 
mistaken, Lady Enid, they are most of your subjects?' 
The Daisy of the Valley stopped smiling. She looked at Ida Emean the elf from the Blue 
Mountains. 

'Pro bono public...' she began, but did not finish. Assire nodded her head seriously, 
indicating that she understood. 
'What can we do?' she said slowly. 'Everything has its price. War requires sacrifice. As it 
turns out, so does peace.' 
 
*** 
 
'It cannot be denied,' the pilgrim said, looking thoughtfully at the elf, who sat motionless 
with his head down. 'Peace negotiation are like a flea market. A bazaar. To buy something, 
others must be sold. That's how the world works. The point is not to buy something that is 
too expensive...' 
'Or to sell for too cheap,' finished the elf, not raising his head. 
 
*** 
 
'Traitors! Vile bastards!' 
'Sons of bitches!' 
'An'badraigh aen cuach!' 
'Nilfgaardian dogs!' 
'Silence!' Hamilcar Danza yelled, banging his fist on the railing of the porch. 
The crossbowmen in the gallery turned their weapons on the elves who crowded in the 
cul de sac. 
'Peace!' Danza yelled even louder. 'Enough! Shut up, officers! More dignity!' 
'You have the audacity to talk about dignity, scoundrel?' shouted Coinneach Da Reo. 
'We spilled blood for you, curse Dh'oine! This is how you repay us? You send us to the 
oppressors of the North? As if we were criminals? Murderers?' 
'I said enough!' Danza thumped his fist into the railing again. 'Let's be very clear about 
one thing, gentlemen! The agreements signed in Cintra, which were recorded the conditions 
of peace, imposes an obligation on the Empire by the Nordlings to issue war criminals...' 
'Criminals?' shouted Riordain. 'Criminals? You filthy Dh'oine!' 
'War criminals,' Danza repeated carefully, ignoring the shouts and clamour of the 
encircled elves. 'Those officers who are accused of terrorism, killing civilians, the torture of 
prisoners, massacring the wounded in hospitals...' 
'You sons of bitches!' shouted Angus Bri Cri. 'We killed because we were at war!' 
'We killed following your orders!' 
'Cuach'te aep ass, bloede dh'oine!' 
'The decision is made!' Danza insisted. 'Your insults and cries will not change anything. 
Please individually approach the guardhouse, please do not resist when being put into 
chains.' 
'We had to stay behind while they fled to the Yaruga,' Riordain gritted his teeth. 'We had 
to stay and fight as commandos. We were fools, gullible fools, we wanted to keep our 
military oath. Well now we will!' 
Isengrim Faoiltiarna, the Steel Wolf, the legendary leader of the Squirrels, and now an 
imperial colonel, tore the silver rays of the Vrihedd brigade from his sleeves and threw them 
on the patio. Other officers followed suit. Hamilcar Danza, who was watching from the 
gallery, frowned. 
'This demonstration is unnecessary,' he said. 'In your place I would not so rashly 
abandon the imperial insignia. It is my duty to inform you that the negotiated peace will 
guarantee a fair trial, mild sentences and early amnesty for imperial...' 
The cul de sac of elves burst into a grim laugh, thundering between the stone walls. 

'Furthermore, I want to warn you,' Hamilcar Danza said curtly, 'that we will only send 
thirty-two officers to the Nordlings. We will not surrender any of the soldiers, who you 
commanded, not one.' 
The laughter ceased as if cut by a knife. 
 
*** 
 
The wind blew on the fire, sending up a shower of sparks and smoke which filled the 
eyes. They hear a howl from the pass. 
'With the trade,' the elf said, breaking the silence, 'everything was for sale. Honour, 
loyalty, a noble's oath, common decency... simple goods have value only as long as there is 
demand for them. If there was not, then it was thrown in the dustbin.' 
'On the rubbish heap of history; said the pilgrim. 'You're right, sir elf. That's what I 
found, there in Cintra. Everything had a price. And was worth as much as what you could get 
in return. Each morning began like a stock market. And like a real stock market sudden ups 
and down were continuously occurring. It was difficult to escape the impression that someone 
else was pulling the strings.' 
 
*** 
 
'Did I hear you right?' Shilard Fitz-Oesterlen asked slowly, his tone and facial expression 
giving the impression of mistrust. 'Are my ears deceiving me?' 
Berengar Leuvaarden, special envoy of the emperor, did not bother to respond. He leaned 
back in his chair, holding his cup of wine which he rocked rhythmically from side to side. 
Fitz-Oesterlen was offended; he then put on a mask of contempt. 
'Either you're lying, you son of a bitch, or you want to dupe me. Either way, I've 
uncovered you. So I'm to understand,' he sniffed, 'that after far-reaching concessions on 
borders, war captives, the recovery of loot, on the question of the Vrihedd brigade officers 
and Scoia'tael commandos, the emperor commands me to reach an agreement and accept the 
impossible demands of the Nordlings regarding the repatriation of settlers?' 
'You understand perfectly, Ambassador,' said Leuvaarden, characteristically dragging out 
his syllables. 'Indeed, I am full of admiration for your comprehension.' 
'The Great Sun, Lord Leuvaarden, do you in the capital ever meditate on the 
consequences of your decisions? The Nordlings are already whispering that our empire is a 
colossus with feet of clay! Even now they cry out that they won, beat us and drove us out! 
Does the Emperor realise that to give further concession will mean accepting their arrogant 
and unreasonable ultimatum? Does the Emperor understand that they will treat this as a sign 
of weakness which could have dire consequences in the future? Does the Emperor 
understand, finally, the fate of several thousand of our settlers in Brugge and Lyria?' 
Berengar Leuvaarden stopped rocking his cup and stared at Shilard, his eyes as black as 
coal. 
 'I have given My Lord Baron an imperial order,' he said. 'When the Baron returns to 
Nilfgaard he can personally ask the Emperor why he issued such unreasonable orders. He 
may also want to reprimand the Emperor. Scold him. Why not? But alone, without my 
mediation.' 
Oh, thought Shilard. I know. Sitting here before me is a new Stefan Skellen. And I'll have 
to deal with him just like Skellen. But it is clear he did not come here for no reason. The 
order could have been brought by a regular messenger. 
'Well,' he said, outwardly calm and confident. 'Woe to the vanquished. The imperial 
order is clear and specific, I will therefore execute it. I will do everything to make it look like 

the outcome of negotiations and not complete defeatism. I understand these things; I've been 
a diploma for thirty years. And my family for four generations. We are a significant, 
influential and rich...family...' 
'I know, I know, of course,' Leuvaarden interrupted with a smile. 'That's why I'm here.' 
Shilard bowed slightly and waited patiently. 
'My dear Baron,' began the envoy, rocking his cup again, 'your difficulties in 
understanding the imperial order arose because you surmised that the victory in the war is 
inextricably bound up with an absurd waste of material resources and human lives and is 
achieved by someone waving a flag and shouting, "Everything I see is mine! I won!" A 
similar opinion is, unfortunately, fairly widespread. But for me and the people who have put 
their trust in me, we don't think so. Victory is supposed to look like this – the defeated have 
to buy goods from the winners, and do it gladly, because the goods of the winners and better 
and cheaper. The winners currency is stronger than the currency of the defeated and the 
vanquished and they begin to have more confidence in their own. Do you understand me, 
Baron Fitz-Oesterlen? Are you slowly beginning to distinguish the winners from the losers?' 
Ambassador Fitz-Oesterlen nodded to confirm. 
'But in order to strengthen and legitimise the victory,' Leuvaarden said dragging out his 
syllables, 'a peace must be signed. A soon as possible and at any cost. Not a ceasefire or 
truce, but a real lasting peace. A strong contract that will build and exclude implementation 
of economic blockades, retaliatory tariffs and trade protectionism.' 
Shilard nodded earnestly. 
'We destroyed their industry and agriculture, according to a predetermined plan,' 
Leuvaarden continued calmly. 'We did this in order to deprive them of their own goods so 
they have to buy ours. But our merchants and products will not cross through closed or 
hostile borders. What will happen then? I will tell you what will happen, dear Baron. We will 
create the crisis of overproduction, because our manufactures are working full speed, hoping 
to export. Large losses will also be felt by the maritime trade, the result of cooperation with 
Novigrad and Kovir. Your influential family, dear Baron, have significant participation in 
such societies. And family, as you are no doubt aware, dear Baron, are the basic building 
blocks of such societies. Did you know?' 
'I know,' Shilard Fitz-Oesterlen lowered his voice, even though he knew that the chamber 
was reliably secure against eavesdropping. 'I understand. However, I would have assurance 
that I'm following the orders of the Emperor... And not some... corporation.' 
'Emperor's pass,' said Leuvaarden. 'Corporations remain. And survive. I understand your 
concern, Baron. You can be sure you are fulfilling the order of the Emperor, which was 
issued in the interest and for the good of the Empire. I do not deny, however, that our 
Emperor was issued some advice from certain corporations.' 
The envoy unbuttoned his collar and pulled out a gold medallion, on which was displayed 
a burning star inside a triangle. 
'An impressive decoration,' Baron Fitz-Oesterlen showed his understanding. 'Without a 
doubt, very expensive... and elitist... Is it possible to buy it somewhere?' 
'No,' replied Berengar Leuvaarden. 'It is necessary to earn it.' 
 
*** 
 
'If the gentlemen and the lady will allow,' Shilard Fitz-Oesterlen's voice took on a 
familiar tone which testified to what he was about to say, was considered important. 'If the 
gentlemen and lady will allow, I will read the content of the message from His Majesty 
Emhyr var Emreis, but the Great Sun, Emperor of Nilfgaard...' 

'No, not again,' Demavend gritted his teeth. Dijkstra quietly moaned. None of this 
escaped Shilard's attention. 
'The imperial message is long,' he admitted. 'I will summarise it, and limit myself to the 
most important points. The Imperial Majesty expresses his satisfaction over the course of the 
deliberations so far and welcomes the achieved compromises and reconciliations. His 
Imperial Majesty wishes to make further progress in the negotiations and to conclude them 
with mutual benefit...' 
'Let's get to the point,' said Foltest, 'And quickly! Let's conclude the mutual benefits and 
return home.' 
'That's the spirit,' Henselt said, who was farther from home than anyone. 'Let us get this 
over with, or we'll be here until winter.' 
'We have one more compromise,' said Meve. 'An issue that we have touched on only a 
few times in passing. Perhaps out of fear that it would cause us to quarrel. It is time to 
overcome that fear. The problem will not disappear by not talking about it.' 
'Right,' said Foltest. 'We must resolve the status of Cintra, the inheritance to the throne 
and Calanthe's successor. The issue is complicated, but I have no doubt we can handle it 
ourselves, right, Your Excellency?' 
'Oh,' Fitz-Oesterlen smiled diplomatically and enigmatic. 'I'm sure the question of 
succession to the throne of Cintra will go smoothly. The solution is simpler than you 
probably expected.' 
 
*** 
 
'I submit for discussion,' Philippa Eilhart announced in a tone that did not invite 
discussion, 'the following proposal – the territory of Cintra's trusteeship. I entrust this 
mandate to Foltest of Temeria.' 
'Foltest's holdings are growing too fast,' Sabrina Glevissig said with a scowl. 'Brugge, 
Sodden, Angren...' 
'We need,' said Philippa, 'a strong state at the mouth of the Yaruga. And in the Marnadal 
Stairs.' 
'It cannot be denied,' Sile de Tansarville nodded, 'we need it. But they need Emhyr var 
Emreis. And I recall that our goal is to compromise, not conflict.' 
'A few days ago Shilard suggested,' recalled Francesca Findabair, 'that Cintra will be 
divided with lines into two demarcation zones, a southern zone and a northern zone...' 
'A foolish idea,' said Margarita Laux-Antille. 'Such a division does not have any 
meaning and only becomes the seed for future conflict.' 
'I believe,' said Sile, 'that Cintra should be turned into a condominium state. 
Administration of the territory should be engaged by both commissioners from the northern 
kingdoms and the Empire of Nilfgaard. The citadel of Cintra would acquire the status of a 
free port... You wish to say something Lady Assire? I'm used to representing my thoughts 
coherently and in full form, but for now... I'm listening.' 
All the sorceresses turned their sights to Assire var Anahid, the Nilfgaardian witch did not 
look the least bit embarrassed. 
'I recommend,' she said in her pleasant, calm voice, 'that we focus on other issues. And 
leave Cintra alone. I have been told about something, which I have not had time to tell you 
ladies. The case of Cintra, dear colleagues, is already resolved and settled.' 
'What?' Philippa's eyes narrowed. 'What's that supposed to mean?' 
Triss Merigold sighed audibly. She already knew. She had already guessed what it meant. 
 
*** 

 
Vattier de Rideaux was sad and depressed. His beautiful and passionate lover, golden-
haired Cantarella was leaving him, suddenly and unexpectedly, without giving a reason or 
explanation. For Vattier, this was a low and terrible blow, he had left crestfallen, nervous, 
distracted and dazed. He had to pay attention, be careful and on guard and not to say 
something stupid while talking to the Emperor. Times of great change did not favour the 
nervous and incompetent. 
'The merchants guild,' Emhyr car Emreis said frowning, 'we have already paid for their 
invaluable help. We have granted them sufficient privileges, more than what they got from 
the previous three emperors together. In addition, we are indebted to Berengar Leuvaarden 
for his help in uncovering the conspiracy. He has received a high and lucrative position. But 
if he is incompetent, despite his merits, he will be shot from a catapult. Make sure that he 
knows this.' 
'I will, Your Majesty. And what of Dijkstra? And his mysterious informant?' 
'Dijkstra would sooner die than reveal who his informant is. However, give Dijkstra a fee 
for the information, which literally fell from the sky... But what? Dijkstra would not take 
anything from me.' 
'If You Majesty will allow...' 
'Speak...' 
'Dijkstra would be happy to accept other information. Something that he doesn't know, 
but would like to know. We could reward him with just such information.' 
'Excellent, Vattier.' 
Vattier de Rideaux sighed with relief. Because he had discreetly turned his head away, he 
was the first to notice the approaching ladies, the Countess Liddertal and the young blonde 
that was entrusted to her care. 
'They're coming,' he pointed out with a movement of his eyes. 'Your Majesty, let me 
remind you... The reason of state... In the interest of the Empire...' 
'Enough,' Emhyr var Emreis interrupted reluctantly. 'I said, I will consider. Think about 
the case and make a decision. And then I will inform you what the decision is.' 
'Very well, Your Majesty.' 
'Anything else?' The White Flame of Nilfgaard said impatiently, tapping his glove on his 
hip. 'What are you waiting for, Vattier?' 
'The issue of Stefan Skellen...' 
'No mercy. Death to traitors. But after a fair trial.' 
'I understand, Your Majesty.' 
Emhyr deigned not to look at him as he said goodbye with a bow and withdrew. Stella 
Congreve was waiting. And so was the blonde girl. 
Here comes the interest of the Empire, he thought. The false princess, the false Queen of 
Cintra. The sovereign to the area around the mouth of the Yaruga River, which is so 
important to the Empire. Here she comes, looking down, terrified, in a white silk dress with 
green sleeves and a necklace in shallow neckline. At Darn Rowan I complimented her dress 
and jewellery selection. Stella knows my tastes. But what am I supposed to do with this doll? 
Put her on a dresser or mantle? 
'Honoured ladies,' he bowed first. Outside of the throne room of Nilfgaard, the rules of 
civility and courtesy to women were obliged, even by the Emperor. They answered him with 
curtsies and bows of their heads. 
They were standing in front of a polite, but still Emperor. 
Emhyr had had enough protocol. 
'Stay here please, Stella,' he said dryly. 'And you, girl, come with me for a walk. Take 
my arm. Cheer up. It's just a walk.' 

They walked side by side down and alley. Imperial Guardsmen, members of the elite 
"Impera" brigade stayed away, but always at the ready. They were trained to protect the 
Emperor, and knew when not to interfere. 
They passed a pond, empty and sad. A very old carp brought by Emperor Torres, had died 
two days earlier. We will have to release a young, strong, carp, Emhyr decided. We'll make a 
medal with his portrait and the date. Vaesse deiraedh aep eigean. Something end, something 
begins. This is a new ear, new times. Let there also be a new carp. 
Lost in thought, he almost forgot about the girl he was holding on his arm. He 
remembered her presence due to her warmth, the smell of lilies and the interest of the empire. 
In that order. 
They stopped by the pond, in the middle rose an artificial island, with a rock garden, a 
fountain and a marble sculpture. 
'Do you know what this figure represents?' 
'Yes, Your Majesty,' she did not immediately answer. 'It represents a pelican, whose 
beak tears at its own breast to feed its children with blood. It is an allegory of a noble 
sacrifice. And also...' 
'I'm listening carefully.' 
'Also of great love.' 
'Do you think,' he held her by the shoulders and turned her to face him, 'that a torn chest 
hurts less?' 
'I don't know...' she stammered. 'Imperial Majesty... I...' 
He took her hand. He felt her twitch, the tremor ran through her hand, arm and shoulder. 
'My father,' he said, 'was a great ruler, but never paid attention to myths and legends, he 
never had the time for such things. He always confused them. Whenever he would bring me 
here, to the park, he said that the sculpture of the pelican was rising from the ashes. At least 
smile, girl, when the Emperor tells you stories from his childhood. That's better, thank you. I 
would be sad to think that you are not enjoying your walk with me. Look into my eyes.' 
'I'm happy... to be here... Your Majesty. It is a huge honour for me... Also a large joy. I 
am very happy...' 
'Really? This is not just courtly flattery? Etiquette from Stella Congreve's classed? Admit 
it, girl.' 
She was silent, her eyes downcast. 
'Your Emperor asked you a question,' said Emhyr var Emreis. 'And when the Emperor 
asked, no one dares be silent. Naturally, no one dares lie.' 
'Really,' she said in a melodious voice. 'I'm really happy, Imperial Majesty.' 
'I believe you,' Emhyr said after a moment's thought. 'I think. Although, I am surprised.' 
'I also...' she whispered. 'I am also surprised.' 
'What? Speak up, please.' 
'I wish we could... walk more often. And talk. But I understand... I understand that this is 
impossible.' 
'You understand well,' he bit his lip. 'Emperors rule the world, but two things they don't 
have control over. Their heart and their time. Both belong to the empire.' 
'I know that,' she said, 'all too well.' 
'I will not be here long,' he said after a moment of heavy silence. 'I have to go to Cintra, 
to grace them with my presence at the peace celebration. You will have to go back to Darn 
Rowan... Cheer up, girl. For the second time, lift your head in my presence. What is that I see 
in your eyes? Tears? This is a serious breach of etiquette, I will have show Countess 
Liddertal my highest displeasure. Lift your head, I said...' 
'Please... forgive Lady Stella... Imperial Majesty, this is my fault. Only mine. Lady Stella 
has taught me... and prepared me well.' 

I've noticed, and I appreciate it. Fear not, Stella does not run the risk of falling from 
grace. She never runs the risk. I was just joking with you. Poorly.' 
'I noticed,' replied the girl, terrified by her own boldness. But Emhyr just laughed. 
Somewhat forced. 
'Well, I like you,' he said. 'Trust me. You are brave. Much like...' 
He stopped. 
Much like my daughter, he finished in his head. A feeling of guilt struck him like a dog 
bite. 
The girl held his gaze. It's not just the work of Stella, thought Emhyr. This really is her 
nature. And despite appearances, she is a diamond that doesn't scratch. No I will not 
authorise Vattier to kill this girl. Cintra, this business interests the Empire, but this issue 
seems to have only one sensible and honourable solution. 
'Give me your hand.' 
It was an order delivered in a stern voice and tone. But even though, he could not help 
feeling that she would have done it willingly. Without coercion. 
Her hand was small and cold. But not shaking anymore. 
'What is your name? Please do not tell me it is Cirilla Fiona.' 
'Cirilla Fiona.' 
'I feel like punishing you, girl. Severely.' 
'I know, Your Majesty. I deserve it. But I... I must be Cirilla Fiona.' 
'I think that you' he said, still holding her hand, 'regret not being her.' 
'I'm sorry,' she whispered. 'I regret that I am not her.' 
'Really?' 
'If I was... truly Cirilla, perhaps, Your Majesty would have been kinder to me. But I am 
just a fake. An imitation. A doppelganger who is not worthy of anything. Nothing...' 
He whirled around and grabbed her arm. Then he released her and stepped back. 
'Would you like a crown? A position?' he spoke quietly, but quickly, pretending not to 
see her violently shake her head. 'Tribute? Compliments? Luxury?' 
He paused. He did not see the that the girl shook her head, denying his unjust accusations, 
perhaps even more unjust by the unspoken ones. 
He breathed loudly and deeply. 
'Do you know, little moth, that what you see in front of you is the flame?' 
'I know, Your Majesty.' 
They were silent for a long time. The smell of spring suddenly whirled in their heads. 
Intoxicating. 
'Being the Empress,' Emhyr finally said dully, 'is not easy, contrary to appearances. I do 
not know if I'll be able to love you.' 
She nodded to indicate that she knew this. He saw a tear on her cheek. Just like then, in 
the Castle Stygga, he felt like a sliver of glass was stuck in his heart. 
He hugged her, pressing her hard against his chest, stroking her hair which smelled like 
lilies. 
'My poor child,' he said in an unnatural voice. 'My poor reason of state.' 
 
*** 
 
Bells rang throughout Cintra. Dignified, deep and solemn. But strangely mournful. 
An unusual beauty, thought hierarch Hemmelfart, looking like everyone else, at the 
hanging portrait, that would measure, like the rest, half a fathom by a fathom, if not more. An 
unusual beauty. A half-breed I bet, she has in her veins the cursed blood of elves. 

Pretty, appreciated Foltest, prettier than those thumbnails shown to me by my secret 
service. But portraits are usually flattering. 
Quite unlike Calanthe, thought Meve. Quite unlike Roegner. Quite unlike Pavetta... 
Hmmm... There were rumours... No, it's not possible. She must be the royal blood, a 
legitimate ruler of Cintra. She must. It is required by reasons of state. And history. 
She was not like I've seen in my dreams, thought Esterad Thyssen, King of Kovir. I'm 
sure she is not the same. But I will not tell anyone. I'll keep this to myself and my Zuleyka, 
together we can decide how we can use this knowledge the dreams have given us. 
That was close, she was to be my wife, this Ciri, thought Kistrin of Verden. I would have 
been the prince of Cintra and heir to the throne, according to custom... I probably would 
have died with Calanthe. Oh well, it is good that she ran away from me. 
Not for a moment do I believe the fables of love at first sight, thougth Shilard Fitz-
Oesterlen. Not for a moment. And yet now Emhyr has married the little barbarian. He 
rejected the possibility of reconciling with imperial nobility and marring their daughters and 
married Cirilla of Cintra. Why? To dominate a small country, that half, if not more, 
Nilfgaard would have gained during negotiations? In order to consolidate his power at the 
mouth of the Yaruga, which is essentially in the hands of the Nilfgaard-Novigrad-Kovir 
maritime trading companies? I do not understand this political necessity, so I suspect they 
did not tell me everything. 
Sorceresses, Sigismund Dijkstra thought. This is the work of sorceresses. But why would 
it not be? Undoubtedly, it was written that Ciri would be Emhyr's wife, Queen of Cintra and 
Empress of Nilfgaard. No doubt it was her destiny. 
Keep it this way, Triss Merigold thought happily. It is a good solution. Ciri will be safe. 
And eventually they'll forget her. They let her live. 
The portrait was finally put in place, the servants who were hanging it withdrew, taking 
the ladder with them. 
At the end of a long line of dark and dusty Cintran nobles, beyond the portrait of Cerbin, 
Coram and Corbett, past, Dagorad and Roegner, beyond proud Calanthe and melancholy 
Pavetta, hung the last portrait. It showed the reigning Empress, the heiress of the royal blood 
and the crown. A slim girl with blond hair and sad eyes in a white dress with green sleeves – 
Cirilla Fiona Elen Riannon, Queen of Cintra and Empress of Nilfgaard. 
Destiny, thought Philippa Eilhart, watching Dijkstra's eyes. 
Poor child, thought Dijkstra, looking at the portrait. She probably thinks this is the end of 
her afflictions and misfortunes. Poor child. 
In Cintra the bells tolled, frightening the gulls. 
 
*** 
 
'Soon after the conclusion of the negotiations and the signing of the peace,' the pilgrim 
continued his story, 'a celebration was held in Novigrad, which culminated in a large military 
parade. As befitting the first day of a new historical epoch, the weather was beautiful.' 
'We are to understand,' the elf ask sarcastically, 'that you were at it? That you attended 
the parade?' 
'I was a little late,' the pilgrim was obviously not someone who was bothered by a little 
sarcasm. 'Like I said, it was a beautiful day. It promised to be such from dawn.' 
 
*** 
 
Vascoigne, commander of the fort of Drakenborg and until recently deputy commander 
for political affairs, eagerly slapped his whip on his boots. 

'Move, move,' he urged his executioners. 'They're expecting more. In Novigrad you can 
celebrate, but here we have to work.' 
The executioners place the nooses around the prisoners necks and withdrew. Vascoigne 
swung his whip again. 
'If anyone wants to say something,' he said dryly, 'this is your last chance.' 
'Long live freedom,' said Cairbre aep Diared. 
'The court was biased against me,' said Orestes Kopps a marauder, pillager and murderer. 
'Kiss my ass,' said Robert Pilch a deserter. 
'Tell Lord Dijkstra, that I'm sorry,' said Lennep, a former agent convicted of bribery and 
fraud. 
'I did not, I did not want too...' cried Istvan Igalffy, swaying on a stump, former 
commandant of the fort, removed from the post and brought before a tribunal for excessive 
acts which are not permitted against the prisoners. 
The sun, like molten gold, exploded over the stockade of the fort. The posts of the 
gallows threw elongated shadows. In Drakenborg, began a new day, beautiful and sunny. 
The first day of a new era. 
Vascoigne's whip lashed his boot. He raised and lowered his hand. 
The stumps were kicked out from under the feet of the condemned. 
 
*** 
 
Throughout Novigrad bells rang. The sound was carried over the mansard roofs of 
merchant houses, until it came to the narrowest and most remote streets. Whistling rockets 
and exploding firecrackers. The crowd cheered, yelled, throwing hats in the air, waving 
handkerchiefs, scarves and flags. 
'Long like the Free Company!' 
'Long live!' 
'Glory to the Condottieri !' 
Lorenzo Molla saluted the crowd and blew a kiss to the beautiful girls. 
'If we are paid with the same enthusiasm with which we are cheered,' he shouted to be 
heard above the uproar, 'then we'll be rich!' 
'It's too bad,' Julia Abatemarco's throat constricted, 'that Frontino couldn't see this...' 
The marched down the main street, Julia Abatemarco, Adam "Adieu" Pangratt and 
Lorenzo Molla, leading a festively dressed Company, who were formed in rows of four, so 
none of the horses, sleek and shiny, moved forward an inch in front of the others. The horses 
of the condottieri were like their riders - calm and haughty, not frightened by the cheers and 
the shouting of the crowd and the only reaction to the coins and flowers flying towards them 
was to shake their heads slightly, almost imperceptibly. 
'Long like the Condottieri!' 
'Long live Adam "adieu" Pangratt! Long live Pretty Kitty!' 
Julia surreptitiously wiped away a tear, and caught a carnation that had been thrown from 
the crowd. 
'I never would have dreamed...' she said. 'We won... Poor Frontino...' 
You're moved, Julia,' Lorenzo Molla smiled. 'I never knew you were such a romantic 
soul.' 
'Well, yes. Attention, company! Face... left!' 
They stood at attention in their saddles, turning the horses heads to face the grandstand 
and the seats and thrones arranged there. 

I can see Foltest, Julia thought. The one with the beard must be Henselt of Kaedwen, and 
the handsome man is Demavend of Aedirn... That Matron must be Queen Hedwig... And the 
boy by her side, Crown Prince Radovid, son of the king that was killed... Poor kid... 
 
*** 
 
'Long live the condottieri! long like Julia Abatemarco! Long live Adam Pangratt! Long 
live Lorenzo Molla!' 
'Long live Constable Natalis!' 
'Long live our monarchs! Long live Foltest, Demavend and Henselt!' 
'Long live Lord Dijkstra!' 
'Long live His Holiness!' A few voices came from the crowd, obviously bribes. 
Novigrad's hierarch Cyrus Englekind Hemmelfart rose and blessed the people and the army 
with his outstretched hands, while irreverently covering Queen Hedwig and young Radovid 
with the skirts of his robe. 
Nobody shouts, "Long live Radovid", thought the prince covered by the hierarch's fat ass. 
No one even looks at me. No one is screaming in honour of my mother. No one remembers my 
poor father. Even today, at a day of triumph, which he so richly deserved. After all, that's why 
he was murdered. 
He felt a gaze on his neck. Delicate like someone he did not know - or knew, but only in 
his dreams. Something that was soft like a brush of a woman's warm lips. He turned his head. 
He discovered the dark unfathomable eyes of Philippa Eilhart fixed on him. 
Wait, thought the prince, looking away. Just wait. 
No one could predict or guess then that this boy of thirteen years, which at that time was a 
person without any relevance in a country ruled by the Regency Council and by Dijkstra, 
would become king. A king who, after he paid all the insults that had been given to his 
mother and him, would go down in history with the name Radovid the Stern. 
The crowd cheered. The ground beneath the hooves of the horses of the condottieri were 
carpeted with flowers. 
 
*** 
 
'Julia?' 
'Yes, Adieu?' 
'Marry me. Become my wife.' 
Pretty Kitty did not answer for a long time, she was surprisingly speechless. The crowd 
cheered. The Novigrad hierarch, sweating and gasping for breath like a big catfish, blessed 
from the stands the burghers and soldiers, the city and the world. 
'You're married, Adam Pangratt.' 
'we have long lived separately. I'm getting a divorce.' 
Julia Abatemarco did not answer. She turned her head. 
Surprised. 
Confused. 
And very happy. Without really knowing why. 
The crowd cheered and threw flowers. The rockets and fireworks burst in artificial light 
above the rooftops and between the noise and the smoke the bells of Novigrad sounded like a 
whimper. 
 
*** 
 

She's a woman, thought Nenneke. She went to war a child. And has come back a woman. 
Confident. Realising who she is. Quiet. Relax. A woman. 
She won the war. By not letting the war destroy her. 
'Deborah,' Eurneid continued listing quietly, 'died of typhus in a camp in Mayena. Prune 
drowned in the Yaruga when a boatload of wounded capsized. Myrrhe was killed by elves, 
Squirrels, during an attack on the hospital in Armeria... Katja...' 
'Tell me, child,' Nenneke gently urged. 
'Katja,' Eurneid cleared her throat, 'met a wounded Nilfgaardian in the hospital. After the 
conclusion of the peace, when the prisoners where exchanged, she went with him to 
Nilfgaard.' 
'I've always said,' sighed the priestess, 'that love knows no boundaries. And what about 
Iola the Second?' 
'Alive,' Eurneid hurried to explain. 'She is in Maribor.' 
'Why did she not come back?' 
The adept bowed her head. 
'She will not return to the temple, Mother,' she said quietly. 'She is at a hospital with 
Mister Milo Vanderbeck , the surgeon, a halfling. She said that she wants to care for the sick. 
This is what she wants to dedicate her life to. Forgive her, Mother.' 
'Forgive?' cried the priestess. 'I'm proud of her!' 
 
*** 
 
'You're late,' Philippa Eilhart said through clenched teeth. 'You're late to a feast that has 
the presence of kings. Bloody hell, Sigismund, your distain for protocol is well known, and 
you do not need to flaunt it, on a day like this...' 
'I have my reasons,' Dijkstra responded with a look from Queen Hedwig and the raising 
of his eyebrows from the hierarch of Novigrad. He also caught the scowl on the face of priest 
Willemer and the sneer on the face of King Foltest. 'Can I have a word with you Phil?' 
'Alone, I imagine...' 
'That would be best,' Dijkstra smiled. 'But, if you prefer, I have no objection to more eyes 
watching. for example, the beautiful eyes of the ladies of Montecalvo.' 
'Lower your voice,' the sorceress mutter, without erasing the smile from her lips.' 
'When will you grant me an interview?' 
'I'll think. I'll let you know. Now leave me alone, this is a ceremony. A great feast. I'll 
remind you, if you hadn't noticed.' 
'A great feast?' 
'We are on the threshold of a new era, Dijkstra.' 
The spy shrugged. 
The crowd was cheering. Fireworks went off. The bells of Novigrad rang, signalling the 
victory and as a sign of great glory. 
But the ringing was strangely mournful. 
 
*** 
 
'Hold the reins, Jarre,' Lucienne said. 'I'm getting something to eat. Wrap the reins 
around your hand. I know you only have one.' 
Jarre felt a blush of shame and humiliation on his face. He was still not used to the 
constant feeling that people had nothing better to do but to stare at his stump and his sleeve 
which was sewn shut. That the world noticed him at all hours, pitying his injury and 

hypocritically lamenting his fortune, while in the depth of their souls despising him as 
something that dared to tamper with his ugliness, the beautiful reigning order. 
Lucienne, he had no choice but to admit, was quite different, in that sense, than the rest of 
the people. She neither pretended not to see or fell into mannerisms that degraded or 
humiliated him. Jarre several times found himself thinking that this blonde girl treated him 
naturally and normally. But that idea constant fought back. He Refused to accept it, because 
he could not bring himself to behave normally or naturally. 
The wagon carrying the war amputees squeaked and rattled. After a short rainy season 
had come the sweltering heat. The potholes formed by the passage of continuous military 
convoys had dried and hardened, becoming ridges, edges and protrusions of fantastic shapes, 
and they rolled over these pulled by four horses. The wagon swung and swayed like a ship in 
a storm. The mutilated, most lame and legless soldiers cursed and swore hoarsely. Lucienne 
held onto Jarre, hugging him, sharing her magical warmth, his prodigious softness and 
exciting mix of smells – horse, leather, hay, oats and girlish sweat. 
The wagon jumped at the next pothole. Jarre pulled on the rein wrapped around his wrist. 
Lucienne, alternately eating bread and sausage clung to his side. 
'Well, well...' she noticed his brass medallion and craftily took advantage that Jarre's one 
hand was occupied with the reins. 'What have we here? A love charm? So you were tricked 
as well? The guy, who invented this trinket, had to be a pretty darn good trafficker. The 
demand for these were great during the war, especially after too much vodka. What is the 
name of the girl you wear inside? Let me see...' 
'Lucienne,' Jarre blushed like a tomato, 'do not open it, please... I'm sorry, but that is my 
personal thing. I do not want to offend you, but...' 
The wagon jumped and Lucienne snuggled into Jarre silently. 
'Ci...ril...la,' he said with effort, he did not expected a peasant girl to have far-reaching 
knowledge. 
'You will not forget about her,' she shut the locket and let it go, then looked at the boy. 
'This Cirilla, that is. If you truly loved her. Amulets and spells are useless. If she loves you, 
she will be faithful and waiting.' 
'For this?' Jarre raised his stump. 
The girl narrowed her eyes, blue as forget-me-nots. 
'If she really loves you, she'll be waiting,' she said firmly. 'And nothing else matters. I 
know this.' 
'You have a lot of experience?' 
'It's none of your business,' Lucienne blushed this time. 'I had, what I had and with 
whom. But do not think I belong with those who nod their head and lie down on their back 
and spread their legs. But I know what I know. If a girl loves a man, so loves all of him and 
not little pieces. Therefore, she loves him even when a piece is missing.' 
The wagon jumped. 
'You are oversimplifying it,' Jarre said through clenched teeth. 'Oversimplifying and 
idealising, Lucienne. You're forgetting the little detail, that is when a man is whole, he is 
supposed to be able to support his wife and family. As a cripple I cannot...' 
'Bah, do not cry into my apron,' she said without a fuss. 'The Black ones took your hand, 
not your head. What are you looking at? I'm from the country, but I have eyes and ears. I'm 
bright enough to know by the way you talk that you are a scholar. In addition...' 
She cleared her throat. Jarre also cleared his throat, and breathed her scent. The wagon 
jumped. 
'Besides,' finished the girl, 'I heard what you were saying to others. That your are 
learned. That you were a scribe in a temple. So the hand... Bah...' 

The wagon had been driving for a while without hitting any potholes, but Jarre and 
Lucienne seemed unaware – they remained firmly pressed together. 
'Well,' she said after a long pause, 'I'm lucky with scholars. There was one... I used to... 
He walked behind me... He knew a lot, and had gone through an academy. It even showed in 
his name.' 
'What was his name?' 
'Semester.' 
'Hey, girl,' called Sergeant Derkacz from behind them, a creepy looking man who was 
crippled during the battle of Mayena. 'Crack the whip over those geldings heads, this cart is 
crawling along like snot down a wall!' 
'Yeah, pick up the pace,' added a second cripple, scratching under his pants leg at a 
stump covered with shiny pink skin. 'We've had enough of these wastelands. I miss the 
taverns. You don't know what I'd do for a beer! Can we not go faster?' 
'I can,' Lucienne turned around on the wagon box. 'But if I break a hole in the wheel or 
the axle, you won't be drinking beer, only rain water. You'll be waiting a week before we can 
bring any more wagons for you.' 
'Too bad,' grinned Derkacz, 'because the other night I had a dream that we were married. 
You could carry me on your back...' 
'You smelly goat,' cried Lucienne. 'The plague take you...' 
She stopped, seeing all the faces of the disabled men travelling in the wagon suddenly 
turn deathly pale. 
'The gods!' cried one of them. 'And we were so close to home...' 
'We are lost,' Derkacz said quietly and without any fuss. He was simply stating a fact. 
And they said, Jarre thought to himself, that there were no longer any Squirrels. That we 
had killed them all. That the issue with the elves had been resolved. 
There were six horses. But on closer inspection there were eight riders. Two of the 
mounts carried two people. All the horses had a stilted, arrhythmic gait, their heads bowed 
low. They looked exhausted. 
Lucienne sighed deeply. 
The elves approached. They looked even worse than their horses. Nothing remained of 
their pride, their disdainful superiority or charismatic differences. Their clothing, usually 
decorative even in the guerrilla squads, was dirty and ragged. Their hair, their pride and 
glory, was matted, sticky with dirt and dried blood. Their big eyes, usually devoid of any 
expression, were now abysses of panic and despair. 
Nothing remained of their differences. Death, fear, hunger and adversity had made them 
ordinary. Very ordinary. 
They did not inspire fear. 
Jarre, for a moment thought that they would linger, but they simply cross paths and 
disappear into the woods, without bothering to look at the wagon and its passengers. They 
only left behind them a smell, an unpleasant smell that Jarre remembered from the field 
hospitals – the smell of misery, urine, and festering wounds. 
They passed by without bothering to look at them. 
But not all. 
An elf with long dark hair, caked with dirt and dried blood, stopped her horse near the 
wagon. She sat in her saddle hunched over, her arm was in a bloody bandage which flies 
climbed on. 
'Toruviel,' said one of her comrades, 'En'ca digne, luned.' 
Lucienne quickly realised what was happening. She knew what she was seeing in the elf, 
having been raised in a village, she had known the livid spectre of hunger. Therefore, she 
reacted instinctive and unequivocal. She offered the elf some bread. 

'En'ca digne, Touruviel,' repeated the elf. He was the only one of all the company 
wearing an emblem on his torn jacket sleeve of the silver lightning of the Vrihedd brigade. 
The cripples in the wagon had remained still, not moving a muscle until that instant, 
suddenly shivering as if a spell had released them. In their hands, held out to the elves, as if 
by magic, appeared food, bread, cheese, slices of bacon and sausages. 
And the elves, for the first time in a thousand years, spread their hands towards humans. 
Lucienne and Jarre were the first people who saw the elves cry. Great choking sobs, not 
even trying to wipe the tears from their dirty faces. Refuting the claims that elves did not 
have tear ducts. 
'En'ca... Digne,' repeated the elf with the lightning bolt on his sleeve. He then reached 
out and took the bread from Derkacz. 
'Thank you,' he croaked, finding it difficult to adjust his lips to the strange language. 
'Thank you, man.' 
After a while, seeing that everyone was finished, Lucienne clicked at the horses and 
jerked the reins. The wagon began to creak and rattle. They were silent. 
It was approaching evening when they met armed horsemen. They were led by a woman 
with white, short-cropped hair, her face disfigured by scars. One bisected her face from the 
corner of her mouth in an arc to her eye. The woman was missing half of her right ear and her 
left arm below the elbow ended in a leather cuff with a brass hook, which the reins were 
wrapped around. 
The woman, with a hostile look that betrayed her fierce desire for revenge, asked about 
the elves. About the Scoia'tael. The terrorists. The fugitives, survivors from a commando unit 
destroyed two days ago. 
Jarre, Lucienne and the cripples in the wagon avoided eye contact with the white-haired, 
one-handed rider and indistinctly mumbled that they had not seen any elves or met anybody 
on the road. 
You lie, thought the woman who was once Black Rayla. I know you are lying. You lie out 
of pity. But even so that will not help them, because I, White Rayla, do not know pity. 
 
*** 
 
'Hooray, dwarves! Long live Els Barclay!' 
In Novigrad the pavement rumbled beneath the shod boots of the veterans of the 
Volunteer Army. The dwarves marched in a formation of five, waving their flags which 
depicted crossed hammers. 
'Long live Mahakam! Long live the dwarves!' 
'Glory and honour to them!' 
Suddenly, someone in the crowd laughed. And soon everybody was laughing. 
'This is a scandal...' gasped Hemmelfart. 'An affront... It is unforgivable...' 
'Vile people,' hissed the priest Willemer. 
'Pretend you do not see them,' Foltest told them calmly. 
'We should not have skimped when dividing the spoils,' said Meve sourly. 'And refused 
to supplement the rations.' 
The dwarven officers retained their seriousness and form, and stood before the grandstand 
and saluted. The non-commissioned officers and soldiers of the Volunteer Army, however, 
expressed their discontent against the austerity measures imposed by the kings and hierarch. 
Some of them, once past the grandstand, showed the kings a bent elbow, other made one of 
their favourite gestures – a clenched fist with an upright middle finger. Scholars describe the 
gesture as digitus infamis. Common people called it something worse. 

The blush on the faces of the kings and the hierarch showed that they were familiar with 
both names. 
'We should not have insulted their greed,' Meve insisted. 'There people are very 
fastidious.' 
 
*** 
 
The howling around Elskerdeg became a gruesome chant. None of the men sitting by the 
fire paid any attention. 
The first to speak after the long silence was Boreas Mun. 
'The world has changed. Justice has been done.' 
'You overdid it a bit with the justice, my friend,' the pilgrim smiled. 'However, I agree 
that the world has changed. Adjusting to the fundamental laws of physics.' 
'I wonder,' said the elf, 'if we are thinking of the same laws.' 
'Every action,' said the pilgrim, 'has a reaction.' 
The elf chuckled, but it sounded friendly. 
'A point to you, human.' 
 
*** 
 
'Stefan Skellen, son of Bertram Skellen, former Imperial Coroner, stand up. The Supreme 
Court of the eternal Empire by the grace of the Great Sun finds you guilty of crimes and 
abuse, of which you were charged. For the treason and active participation in a conspiracy 
against the Empire as well as the person of the Imperial Majesty. Your guilt has been ratified 
and proven and the Tribunal has found without any extenuation circumstances. Also His 
Imperial Majesty has exercised his right not to grant a pardon. Stefan Skellen, son of Bertram 
Skellen, you will be transported from this courtroom to the Citadel, where you will be held 
until the proper time comes. As a traitor to your homeland of Nilfgaard, you are unworthy to 
tread upon its ground; you will be laid on a wooden skid and dragged by horses to 
Millennium Square. As a traitor to his homeland of Nilfgaard, you are unworthy to breathe 
the air; you will be hanged by the neck on the gallows between heaven and earth. So you will 
stay there until you die. Then your body will be cremated and the ashes scattered to the winds 
on the four sides of the world. Stefan Skellen, son of Bertram Skellen, traitor. I the Chairman 
of the Supreme Court of the Empire, sentence you and this is the last time I will speak your 
name. From now on, let it be forgotten.' 
 
*** 
 
'We did it, we made it!' Professor Oppenhauser shouted as he burst into the dean's office. 
'We did it, gentlemen! Finally! Finally! It works! It moves! It works!' 
'Really?' Jean La Voisier, professor of chemistry, called Carbonstinker by his students, 
asked sceptically. 'Is it really possible? And how, out of curiosity, does it work?' 
'Perpetual motion!' 
'Perpetuum mobile?' exclaimed Edmund Bumbler, the elderly zoology lecturer. 'You're 
not exaggerating, my dear colleague?' 
'Not at all!' Oppenhauser exclaimed, jumping like a goat. 'Not at all! It works! I've 
launched a functional mobile and it works! Without stopping! Perpetually! For ever and ever! 
There are no words to describe it, colleagues, you have to see it! Come with me, hurry!' 
'I'm eating breakfast,' Carbonstinker protested, but his protest was lost in the commotion, 
excitement and widespread bustle. 

The teachers, graduates and students stood up to collect their togas, capes and gowns and 
ran to the door, led by the shouting and gesticulation Oppenhauser. Carbonstinker dismissed 
them with a digitus infamis and returned to the roll on his plate. 
The group of scholars were on the march ready to see the fruit of Oppenhauser's thirty 
years of efforts, they ran quickly towards the office and were about to open the door when 
suddenly the ground trembled. Noticeably. And strongly. Very strongly. 
It was a seismic shock, one of a series of shocks caused by the destruction of the castle 
Stygga the hiding place of the sorcerer, Vilgefortz. The seismic wave from far off Ebbing had 
reached here to Oxenfurt. 
With a clatter, several panes of stained glass fell from the front of the Department of Fine 
Arts. The dusty bust of Nicodemus de Boot, the first rector of the academic institution, fell 
from its pedestal. Carbonstinker's cup of tea fell from the table where he was eating his roll. 
From a banana tree a freshmen from the physics department, Albert Solpietra, fell while 
trying to impress the female medical students. 
The perpetual motion machine of Professor Oppenhauser, the legendary inventor, moved 
for the last time, before standing still. Forever. And it was never possible to restart it. 
 
*** 
 
'Long live the dwarves! Long live Mahakam!' 
What a band, what soldiers, thought the hierarch Hemmelfart, as he bless the parade with 
his trembling hands. Who are they cheering here? The venal condottieri, the obscene 
dwarves, what kind of madness is this? In the end, who won this war, them or us? By the 
gods, I have to warn the monarchs. When historians and scribes are put to work, we must 
subject their works through censorship. Mercenaries, witchers, murderers for hire, non-
humans and all kinds of suspicious items should disappear from the annals of mankind. We 
have to erase them. Not a word about them. Not a word. 
And not a word about him too, he thought, clenching his lips and looking at Dijkstra, 
watching the parade with a clearly bored expression. 
It will be necessary, thought the hierarch, to issue a command to the kings about Dijkstra. 
His presence is an insult to decent people. This atheist and villain. Let him disappear without 
a trace. And let him be forgotten. 
 
*** 
 
This is what you think, you sanctimonious purple pig, thougth Philippa Eilhart, 
effortlessly reading the hierarch's mind. Do you want to rule, do you want to dictate and 
influence? Would you like to decide? Never! The only thing you can decide about is your 
haemorrhoids and even that is on your own ass, and you decisions there will not be relevant 
either. 
And Dijkstra remains. As long as I need him. 
 
*** 
 
Once you make a mistake, thought the priest Willemer, fixing his eyes on the shiny red 
lips of Philippa Eilhart. Or any of you make a mistake. And you'll lose your conceit, 
arrogance and pride. The plots that you weave. Your immorality. Your atrocity and 
perversions to which you surrender, in which you live. All light will eventually leave, and the 
pestilence of your sins will spread when you make a mistake. The moment will come. 

Because even if you do not make a mistake, I will find a way to defame you. Some 
misfortune will befall mankind – a curse, a plague, a pestilence of perhaps an epidemic... 
Then all the blame will be on you. You will be punished for not having been able to prevent 
the plague, by not knowing how to avoid its consequences. You will carry with you all the 
blame. 
And then I will light the fire. 
 
*** 
 
The old tomcat, called Ginger because of the colour of his coat, died. Ugly. Convulsing in 
agony, clawing, vomiting blood and pus and suffering from bloody diarrhoea. He meowed, 
even though he knew it was beneath his dignity. His meow was pitifully weak. He was losing 
strength quickly. 
Ginger knew why he was dying. Or at least figured out what had killed him. 
A few days ago a strange freighter entered the harbour at Cintra, an old grimy hulk, which 
carried on the bow a barely legible inscription "Catriona". Ginger – obviously - could not 
read the name. A rat, walking down a mooring rope, came down to the dock. Just one. It was 
a mangy and dirty looking rat. And it was missing an ear. 
Ginger bit the rat. He was hungry, but his instinct stopped his from devouring this 
abomination. However, several large, black, shiny fleas jumped from the rat and settled in his 
fur. 
'What happened to this cat?' 
'Probably been poisoned.' 
'Ugh, it stinks! Remove it from here, woman!' 
Ginger stiffened and noiselessly opened his bloody mouth. He no longer felt the broom 
which the lady of the house thanked him with for his eleven years of catching mice. He was 
expelled from the house, dying in a gutter full of suds and urine. Dying and also wishing 
those ungrateful people would also fall ill. To suffer as much as he was. 
His last wish was soon fulfilled. On a large scale. A scale so large a cat's mind could not 
even imagine. 
The woman, who expelled Ginger out into the gutter, paused and pulled her skirt up so 
she could scratch above her knee. It itched. 
A flea had bitten her. 
 
*** 
 
The stars twinkled brightly over Elskerdeg. The sparks from the fire vanished into this 
background. 
'Neither the peace of Cintra,' said the elf, 'nor the more pompous parade at Novigrad can 
be considered a turning point or milestone. What are their meaning? Governments do not 
create history with revenues and decrees and no one will accept their authority as truth. One 
of the brighter manifestation of human arrogance is your so-called historiography, trying to 
deliver opinions and verdicts on "past events" as you call them. This is typical of you 
humans, who nature has given an existence as fleeting as that of an insect or an ant, with your 
ridiculous life-spans under a hundred years. Your fleeting existence is trying to adapt to the 
complexity of the world. You refuse to take note that history is a process that constantly 
continues and never ends; it cannot be divided into sections from here to here, from date to 
date. It is not impossible to define history , let alone change it, by a proclamation by a 
monarch. Even if you win the war.' 

'Do not undertake a philosophical discourse,' the pilgrim said. 'As I said, I am a simple 
man. I will, however, draw attention to two things. Firstly, a short life protects us against 
decadence, forcing people to live intensely and fully to take advantage of every moment of 
life and enjoy it. I speak as a human being, but that same thought probably occurred to the 
long lived elves who were going off to fight in the Scoia'tael commandos. Correct me if I'm 
wrong.' 
The pilgrim waited a reasonable amount of time, but no one corrected him. 
'Secondly,' he continued, 'it seems to me that the governments, thought not being able to 
change history, can with their interference create the illusion which is quite convincing. They 
have the tools and the methods.' 
'Oh yes,' said the elf, turning his face away. 'The powerful have tools and methods. And 
there is no arguing with them.' 
 
*** 
 
The galley, bumped against the rail of the pier that was covered in piles of seaweed and 
shells. The moorings were thrown. There were shouts, oaths and commands. 
Gulls collected garbage that floated on the surface of the water. On the shore a crowd was 
waiting –mostly soldiers. 
'End of the lines, elves,' said the Nilfgaardian commander. 'We are in Dillingen. The 
soldiers are waiting for you.' 
He was right, they were waiting for them. 
None of the elves – and certainly not Faoiltiarna – did not believe the assurances that they 
would receive fair trails and amnesty. The Scoia'tael officers from the Vrihedd brigade did 
not have any false hopes about the fate that awaited them after the Yaruga. Most were 
reconciled, stoically accepting it and resigned themselves. They were convinced that nothing 
else could surprise them. 
They were wrong. 
They were shoved from the galley. Their chains rattled noisily. They were driven down 
the pier and led to a boardwalk, between two rows of armed soldiers. There were civilians 
there too, whose quick eyes jumped from one prisoners face to another. 
They will carry out the selection, thought Faoiltiarna. He was not mistaken. The chances 
of his scarred face being overlooked were not possible. 
'Isengrim Faoiltiarna. The Iron Wolf. What a nice surprise!' 
The soldiers dragged him out of the crowd of prisoners. 
'Va Faill,' Coinneach Da Reo called after him, who was also identified and dragged off 
by other men who wore the bade of the red eagle of Redania. 'Se'ved, caerme se dea!' 
'You'll see him,' growled the civilian who had picked out Faoiltiarna, 'but only in hell! 
They are already waiting for him in Drakenborg. Wait! Isn't that Riordain? Take him!' 
The next to be selected was Angus Bri Cri. 
They had only selected three of them. Only three. 
Faoiltiarna realised what was happening and suddenly, to his surprise, he began to feel 
afraid. 
'Va Faill!' Angus Bri Cri shouted, as he was dragged away with his other brethren. 'Va 
Faill, fraeren!' 
A soldier pushed him brutally. 
 They did not take them far. They came to a hut close to the marina. Just off the dock, 
which swayed with a forest of masts. 

The civilian nodded. Faoiltiarna was pushed up against a pole, under a beam over which 
they had thrown a rope. They began to attach an iron hook to the rope. Riordain and Angus 
sat beside him on a bench. 
'Mister Riordain, Mister Bri Cri,' said the civilian coldly. 'You have been covered by the 
amnesty. The court has decided to be gracious. Justice must be satisfied, however,' he added 
without waiting for a response. 'for the families for those you have killed. The verdict has 
been handed down.' 
Both elves did not have time to scream. From behind them a noose was thrown around 
their necks and pulled. They fell off of the bench and were dragged across the floor. With 
their hands cuffed they were unable to loosen the ropes. Executioners knelt on their chests. 
Knives flashed, drawing blood. The noose was not able to mute the sounds that made hair 
stand on end. 
It took a long time. It always did. 
'Your verdict, Mister Faoiltiarna,' said a third civilian to the elf, 'has come with an 
additional specialty. Something extra...' 
Faoiltiarna was not going to wait for any specialty. The locked handcuffs, which he had 
worked on for the last two nights, now opened as if by magic. 
A terrible blow from the heavy chain toppled both of the soldiers guarding him. 
Faoiltiarna next jumped up and hit a civilian in the face with his chains, then jumped through 
a small window covered in cobwebs, sweeping away the glass and frame, and leaving 
remains of his blood and shreds of his clothes. 
He clattered onto the planks of the pier. He tumbled, rolled and dived into the water, 
among the fishing boats and barges. The thick chains which were still attached to his right 
wrist, dragged him to the bottom. Faoiltiarna fought with all his strength to fight for his life, 
that until recently he thought he hadn't cared about. 
'Catch him!' the soldiers tore out of the shed. 'Catch him! Kill him!' 
'There!' shouted others, coming from further down the pier. 'To the boats!' 
'Shoot him!' shouted the civilian hoarsely, trying to stem the blood with both hands that 
flowed from his eye. 'Kill him!' 
He heard the click of crossbows. Gulls flew past, squealing. 
The dirty water between the barges began to spay with the impact of arrows. 
 
*** 
 
'Hurray!' The parade was lengthening and the multitudes of Novigrad were showing 
symptoms of fatigue and hoarseness. 'Hurray!' 
'Glory to the kings!' 
Philippa Eilhart looked around, making sure that no one unauthorised was listening and 
leaned in towards Dijkstra. 
'What did you want to talk to me about?' 
The spy also looked around. 
'The assassination of King Vizimir in July last year.' 
'I'm listening' 
'The half-elf who murdered the king,' Dijkstra lowered his voice even more, 'was 
definitely crazy. But he was not alone.' 
'What are you saying?' 
'Quiet,' hissed Dijkstra. 'Hush, Phil.' 
'Do not call me Phil. Do you have evidence? What? From where?' 
'You'd be surprised, Phil, if I told you where. When can I expect an audience with Your 
Ladyship?' 

Philippa Eilhart's eyes were like two black bottomless lakes. 
'Soon, Dijkstra.' 
Bells rang. The crowd cheered hoarsely. The troops marched. The petals of flowers fell 
like snowflakes on the pavement of Novigrad. 
 
*** 
 
'Are you still writing?' 
Ori Reuven flinched and made a splash. He had served Dijkstra for nineteen years, but he 
was still not used to the stealthy movements of his boss, his sudden appearance and where or 
how he did it. 
'Good evening, ahem, ahem, my lord...' 
'Shadow People,' Dijkstra read the front of the manuscript that he had taken from the 
table. 'Or the story of His Majesty's Secret Service, written by Oribasius Giafranco Paolo 
Reuven, law grad... Oh, Ori. At your age, such nonsense...' 
'Ahem, ahem...' 
'I came to say goodbye, Ori.' 
Reuven looked at him in amazement. 
'You see, my faithful friend,' said the spy, without waiting for the clerk to cough, 'I am 
old, and besides that, I am stupid. I said a word to one person. Only one. And only one word. 
It was one word too many, and one person too many. Pay attention, Ori. Do you hear?' 
Ori Reuven rolled his astonished eyes and shook his head. Dijkstra was silent for a 
moment. 
'You do not hear,' he said after a moment. 'And I hear them. In the corridors. Rats running 
around the city of Tretogor. Here we have them. Approaching on their soft little paws.' 
 
*** 
 
They emerged from the darkness of the shadows. Black, masked and fast as rats. The 
guards and sentries in the antechamber succumbed without a cry to the lightning strikes of 
their stilettos with narrow angular edges. 
Blood ran over the floor of the Palace of Tretogor, on its swept and stain wooden floors, 
seeping into the rare carpets from Vengerberg. 
They came down all corridors, leaving a trail of corpses. 
'There,' said one, pointing to a door. His voice was muffled by a scarf that covered his 
face up to his eyes. 'Through there. Through the office where old Reuven works.' 
'There is no escape,' said the one who was in charge, his eyes shone through the velvet 
masks openings. 'Behind the desk is a blind room, it does not even have a window.' 
'All the corridors are covered. All the doors and all the windows. He cannot escape. He is 
in our trap.' 
'Forward!' 
The door swung open and weapons gleamed. 
'Death! Death to the murderous torturer!' 
'Ahem, ahem?' Ori Reuven rolled his myopic and fearful eyes. 'What do you want? How 
can I, ahem, ahem, help you, gentlemen?' 
The murderers went to the door to Dijkstra's private chamber rushing around the room 
like rats, penetrating every nook and cranny. They flew over the floor, picking at tapestries, 
painting and panels. With their stilettos they tore the curtains and upholstery. 
'He's gone!' shouted one, running from the office. 'He's gone!' 

'Where is he?' asked the leader, leaning over Ori and drilling him with a look from behind 
the holes of his black mask. 'Where is that bloody dog?' 
'Not here,' said Ori Reuven, without fear. 'You can see that for yourself.' 
'Where is he? Speak up! Where is he?' 
'I don't know, ahem, ahem,' Ori coughed. 'Am I my brother's keeper?' 
'You will die, old man!' 
'I am an old man. I'm sick. And very tired. Ahem, ahem. I do not have any fear of your 
knifes.' 
The murderers left the room at a run. And disappeared as quickly as they appeared. 
They did not kill Ori Reuven. They were following orders. And among those orders 
where nothing concerning Ori Reuven. 
Oribasius Giafranco Paolo Reuven, spent six years in various prisons, interrogated 
repeatedly by successive judges, who questioned him on various topics, which often did not 
seem to make any sense. 
After six years he was released. At that time he was very ill. Scurvy had left him without 
teeth, anaemia hairless, glaucoma sightless and asthma without breath. 
During the interrogation they broke the fingers on both hands. 
He lived for less than a year in the wild. He died in a temple hospice. In misery. 
Forgotten. 
The manuscript of his book Shadow People, or the story of His Majesty's Secret Service 
disappeared without a trace. 
 
*** 
 
The sky was getting light to the east, the tops of the trees had a pale aura that heralded 
dawn. 
There had been silence around the bonfire for a long time. the pilgrim, the elf and the 
tracker watched the dying fire and said nothing. 
Elskerdeg was again silent. The howling spectre had moved on, tired of howling at them, 
having finally understood that the three individuals sitting around the fire had seen too many 
horrors to worry about a single spectre. 
'If we are to travel together,' Boreas Mun said suddenly, his eyes still lingering on the 
embers of the fire, glowing ruby-red, 'we ought to overcome our misgivings. Leave behind 
everything that happened. the world has changed. We have a new life ahead of us. Something 
ends, something begins... We hoped...' 
He paused and coughed. He was not used to talking about these things and was afraid of 
ridicule. But his companions were not taking it as a joke or laughing. On the contrary, Boreas 
felt warmth emanating from them. 
'We hoped that beyond Elskerdeg Pass,' he continued, 'that the we will be safer in 
Zerrikania or Haakland. We expect a long and dangerous journey. If we are going to explore 
it together... we must overcome our misgivings. My name is Boreas Mun.' 
The pilgrim with the brimmed hat stood, straightening his powerful frame, and shook the 
outstretched hand towards him. The elf also rose. A strange grimace appeared on his macabre 
disfigured face. 
After shaking hands with the tracker, the pilgrim and the elf also shook hands. 
'The world has changed,' said the pilgrim. 'Something ends. I'm Sigi Reuven.' 
'Something begins,' the elf with the scarred face grimaced in what, according to all 
indications, was a smile. 'My name is... Wolf Isengrim.' 
They shook hands quickly. forcefully, even with abruptness. 

For a moment it seemed like a preamble to a battle, more than a gesture of harmony. But 
only for a moment. The wood in the fire threw up sparks, celebrating the event with lively 
fireworks. 
'The evil take me,' grinned Boreas Mun, 'if it's not the beginning of a beautiful friendship.' 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

...As well as many of the other faithful, St. Philippa was also besmirched with betraying 
the Kingdom, inducing riots and plotting a coup. Willemer, a heretic and sectarian, 
unlawfully appointed himself the title of archpriest, and ordered St. Philippa to be thrown 
into a dark dungeon, and to plague her with cold and hunger, until she confessed to her sins 
of which she was accused and repented. Also various instruments of torture were used to try 
and break her spirit. But ST. Philippa with distain, spit in his face and accused him of 
sodomy. 
The heretic had her disrobed and whipped her with barbed wire and placed sharp 
splinters under her nails. While unceasingly preaching about his faith and denouncing the 
Goddess. But St. Philippa laughed at him and recommended to him to heal his sick mind. 
Willemer then gave the order to have her taken to the rack and stretched, while tearing 
her body with sharp hooks and burning her with candles. Although thus tormented, St. 
Philippa showed no weakness in body and indeed her resistance and endurance seemed 
almost superhuman. The executioner's arms went limp and with fear they retreated from her. 
Then the filthy heretic, Willemer, began to threaten them and told them to continue the 
torment. They burned St. Philippa with red-hot irons, pulled her limbs out of their joints and 
pulled at her breasts with blacksmith tongs. And although she passed away from this torment, 
she confessed nothing. 
The shameless heretic Willemer, we read in the books of our holy fathers, later suffered 
for this punishment and it was that lice and worms began to eat him alive, his entrails rotted 
away and he died miserably. His carcass carried with it a foul stench and nobody wanted to 
bury him, and so he was dropped in a swamp. 
For the suffering and death of St. Philippa the eternal memory of a martyr's crown 
rightfully belongs. Let us give the Great Mother Goddess praise for her lessons and 
teachings. Amen. 
 
The life of St. Philippa, martyr of Mons Calvus, 
From the Book of Martyrs compiled in the Breviary of Tretogor, 
For the contemplation of the holy fathers and mothers. 
 
 

