Chapter Seven 
The wind picked up, clouds rushed from the west and gradually enveloped the 
constellations. The Dragon vanished, the Lady Winter and then the Seven Goats. Finally the 
Eye disappeared, the constellation that shone the brightest. 
The dome of the sky gleamed along the horizon briefly with lightning. It was joined by a 
dull thunder clap. The storm grew more violent, throwing dust and dry leaves into her eyes. 
The unicorn whinnied and sent another mental signal. 
We must not waste time. Our only hope is a quick getaway. At the right place and the 
right time. Hurry Star Eyes. 
 I am the Lady of the Worlds. I am of the Elder Blood. I am from the blood of Lara 
Dorren, the daughter of Shiadhal. 
Ihuarraquax whinnied again, urging her to hurry. Kelpie whinnied as well. Ciri pulled on 
a pair of gloves. 
'I'm ready,' she said. 
A buzz sounded in her ears. A glow. And then darkness. 
 
*** 
 
The curses of the Fisher King, while he pulled and twisted on a rope on his boat trying to 
free it from the tangled web at the bottom of the lake, broke the silence of the afternoon. The 
oars, which were loose, rattled softly. Nimue coughed impatiently and Condwiramurs turned, 
leaving the window and leaned back over the prints. There was one print that drew the eye 
more than the other. A girl with ruffled hair, sitting on a prancing horse. Next to her was a 
white unicorn. 
'Perhaps for this part of the legend,' mused the adept, 'the historians had no objection and 
just recognised it as a fictional story or a metaphor. But the artists and painters, took a liking 
to this episode. Look, here is a picture with Ciri with a unicorn. Here is Ciri with a unicorn on 
a cliff above the sea, here on a narcotic induced landscape, and here under two moons.' 
Nimue was silent. 
'In short,' Condwiramurs threw the prints onto the table, 'Ciri and the unicorn from all 
sides. Ciri and the unicorn in the labyrinth of worlds, Ciri and the unicorn in the abyss of 
time...' 
'Ciri and the unicorn,' interrupted Nimue, looking out the window at the lake, to the boat 
with the Fisher King. "Ciri and the unicorn appearing out of nothingness like ghosts and 
hanging over a lake, a lake that unites time and places like a bridge, all the time different and 
yet always the same?' 
'How?' 
'Phantoms,' Nimue said not looking at her. 'Visitors from other dimensions, other levels, 
other places, other times. Visions that transform one's life. Transforms your life and your 
destiny... Without knowing. For them it is... just another place. The wrong place, wrong 
time. Who knows how many times...' 
'Nimue,' Condwiramurs interrupted her with a forced laugh. 'You recall that I'm the 
dreamer here. And you all of a sudden begin to divine. You were talking, like you saw it... in 
a dream.' 
The Fisher King, judging from the intensity of his voice and curses, failed to untangle the 
rope, and it broke. Nimue was silent, looking at the pictures. Ciri and the Unicorn. 
'It is true,' she said at last, 'I have seen this in my dreams. I have seen it in my dreams 
many times. And once while awake.' 

 
*** 
 
The journey from Czluchow to Malbork may under some circumstances take up to five 
days. And because Grand Master Winrich von Kniprode letter had to reach the addressee no 
later than the day of Pentecost, Heinrich von Schwelborn the knight was not slow and left the 
day after the Sunday of Exaudi Domine, to be able to travel safely and without any risk of 
delay. Slowly but steadily. The knight's approach was greatly enjoyed by his company, six 
crossbowmen, commanded by Hasso Planck, the son of a baker from Cologne. The 
crossbowmen and Planck were more accustomed to these knights cursing, shouting and 
ordering them to ride their horses to death to arrive on time and then casting all the blame on 
their poor servants for any delays. 
It was cold, although it was cloudy. From time to time it drizzled, and fog rippled through 
the ravines. The hills covered in dense vegetation reminded the knight Heinrich of his native 
Thuringia. The crossbowmen sang at the rear the ballad of Walther von Vogelwiede and 
Hasso Planck dozed in the saddle. 
 
If you love a good woman 
It is the cure to all iniquity... 
 
The travel proceeded peacefully and who knows, maybe the end would have been 
peaceful if not for the fact that around noon the knight Hienrich saw at the bottom of the 
road, a shimmering lake. And since the next day was Friday and custom decreed that they fast 
from red meat, the knight ordered them to enter the water and look for fish. 
The lake was large, it even had an island. No one knew what its name was, but it was 
surely called Sacred. In this pagan country every second lake was called Sacred. 
The hooves of the horses crushed shells on the shore. The fog hung over the lake and the 
wilderness. There were no signs of boats or nets, not a soul. We will have to look elsewhere, 
Heinrich von Schwelborn thought. And if not, then so be it. We will eat what we have in our 
saddlebags, even the jerky, and we'll confess to chaplain Malbork, who can grant us 
absolution for our sins. 
He was about to give the order when in his head, under his helmet, started a buzz. Hasso 
Planck released a sharp cry. Von Schwelborn looked in the same direction and crossed 
himself. 
He saw two horses – one white and the other black. In the next moment he noticed that 
the white horses head was domed with a twisted horn that rose from its forehead. He also 
realised that the black horse, actually a sable mare, had a girl sitting on it with grey hair 
which covered part of her face. The visions seemed not to touch either the land or the water, 
and he had the feeling that they were part of the mist that twisted above the surface of the 
lake. 
The black horse whinnied. 
'Ooops,' the girl with the grey hair said quite clearly. 'Ire lokke, ire tedd! Squaess'me.' 
'Saint Ursula, Patroness...' Hasso stammered, pale as death. The crossbowmen froze with 
open mouths, and made the sign of the cross in front of them. 
Von Schwelborn also crossed himself, and with a trembling hand drew his sword from its 
scabbard strapped to his saddle. 
'Holy Mary, Mother of God!' he cried. 'Stand with me!' 
Knight Heinrich did not bring shame to his ancestors that day, including Dietrich von 
Schwelborn, who valiantly fought against Damietta and was one of the few to not run away 

when the Saracens conjured and released a horse of black demons. Kicking his heels into his 
horse and remembering his ancestors, Heinrich von Schwelborn charged the apparition. 
'By the Order and Saint George!' 
The white unicorn reared back and the black mare danced. The girl, you could see at a 
glance was frightened as knight Heinrich rushed to the attack. God knows how it would have 
ended, all of a sudden a gust of wind brought a scrap of mist from the lake, and the vision 
vanished in a rainbow of colours like crushed stones or broken stained glass. The phantoms 
disappeared – the unicorn, the mare and the strange girl... 
The sorrel on which Heinrich von Schwelborn was mounted entered the lake with a 
splash, stopped and shook its head and snorted, chewing at the bit. 
Hasso Planck mastered the reluctant horse and headed for the knight. Von Schwelborn 
was breathing and wheezing, his eyes bulging like a fishes. 
'The bones of Saint Ursula, Saint Korduli and all the eleven thousand virgin martyrs...' 
Hasso Planck managed. 'What was it? Knight Heinrich? A miracle? A revelation?' 
'The devil's work!' von Schwelborn gasped, now only pale and trembling. 'Black magic! 
Witchcraft! A damned thing, pagan and demonic.' 
'We'd better get out of her, Sir. The sooner... We are not far from Pelpin, let the church 
bells guide us...' 
In the same forest, on a hill, the knight Heinrich looked down one last time. The wind 
drove the fog back in places and the wrinkled surface of the lake became visible. 
Over the water circled a great eagle. 
'Wicked, pagan country,' Heinrich von Schwelborn muttered. 'Lot and lots of hard work 
await us; the law of the Teutonic Knights will finally drive the devil from here.' 
 
*** 
 
'Horsey,' Ciri said reproachfully, and ironically at the same time. 'I would not want to 
rush you, but I'm in a bit of a hurry to get to my world. My loved ones need me, you know. 
Instead we almost fall into a lake and see a man in funny clothes, then we see a band of dirty 
screamers with clubs and finally a madman with a cross! These are not my world or my time! 
Please try to get better. Please.' 
Ihuarraquax whinnied and nodded his horn and sent Ciri a mental idea. Ciri 
misunderstood. She had no time to thin since the inside of her skull was again flooded by a 
cold clarity, her ears buzzed and her body tingled. 
And again the darkness engulfed her. 
 
*** 
 
Nimue, laughing with delight, pulled the man's hand, they both ran to the lake, dodging 
among the birches and alders. On the sandy shore, Nimue kicked off her sandals, lifted her 
dress and ran barefoot into the water. The man pulled off his shoes, but did not go into the 
water. He took off his cloak and carefully spread it on the ground. 
Nimue ran to him and hugged him around the neck. She stood on tiptoe, and even so the 
man had to bend deeply to kiss her. They did not call her Thumbelina for nothing, but now 
since she was eighteen and was accomplished in the magical arts, she only permitted her 
closes friends to call her that. And some men. 
The man, not taking his lips from Nimue's, slid his hand behind her neck. 
Then it went quickly. They were both on the sand on his cloak. Nimue's skirt was hiked 
up over her waist, her legs wrapped around the man's hips and her nails dug into his 
shoulders and back. When he took her, as usual, he was too impatient, she gritted her teeth, 

but quickly caught up in the excitement of it. The man emitted ridiculous sounds. Over his 
shoulder Nimue watched slowly flying clouds of fantastic shapes. 
Something dimly rang like a bell under water. Nimue heard a murmur in her ears. Magic, 
she thought, and turned her head away from the face of the man. Standing by the shore – 
hanging above the surface, was a white unicorn. At his side was a black mare. In the saddle 
on the horse sat a girl... 
But I know this legend, the thought flashed through Nimue's head. I know this story! 
When I was a child I heard this tale, from the old wandering storyteller... The Witcheress 
Ciri... The scar on her cheek... The black mare, Kelpie... The unicorn... The Land of the 
Elves... 
The movement of the man, who was oblivious to the events going on, became more 
violent, and he issued funnier sounds. 
'Ooops,' said the girl sitting on the black mare. 'Another mistake! Not here, not at this 
time. To make matters worse, I think we arrived at the completely wrong time. Sorry.' 
The image faded and burst, exploding like painted glass, into a riot of rainbow 
luminescence, radiance and brightness, then everything disappeared. 
'No!' Nimue cried. 'No! Don't disappear! Don't run!' 
She straightened her knees and tried to break free of the man, but could not – he was 
more powerful than her and heavier. The man groaned and grunted. 
'Ooooh, Nime...Oooh!' 
Nimue screamed and sunk her teeth into his shoulder. 
They lay side by side on the crumpled cloak, sweaty and anxious. Nimue looked back at 
the lakeshore. The waves gave off an off-white foam. The reeds bent in the wind. The 
colourless, bleak emptiness that remained after the lost legend. 
Tears flowed down Nimue's face. 
'Nimue... Is something worng?' 
'Yes, there was...' She clung to him, but still looked at the lake. 'Don't talk. Hold me and 
say nothing.' 
The man smiled. 
'I know what happened,' he said boastfully. 'The earth moved, right?' 
Nimue smiled sadly. 
'Not only the earth,' she said after a moment. 'Not only the earth.' 
 
*** 
 
A flash. Darkness. The next place. 
 
*** 
 
The place was gloomy, sinister and repulsive. 
Ciri involuntarily hunched in her saddle. She was shaken, both physically and mentally. 
Kelpie's horseshoes rang on something flat and smooth, durable and as hard as rock. After a 
long time gliding in oblivion where everything was soft, the mare whinnied and began to pull 
violently to one side; smashing her hooves into the hard rock with such a staccato that Ciri's 
teeth rang. 
The second shook was from a smell. Ciri gasped ad covered her mouth and nose with her 
sleeve. She could feel her eyes immediately fill with tears. 
Around her floated an acid, corrosive, dense stench, it was choking and disgusting and 
she could not remember ever smelling anything like it. What it was – was the stench of 
decay, cadaverous, the final stench in the chain of degradation and degeneration, the smell of 

ruin and destruction, and she felt that whatever was rotting had smelt no better when it had 
been alive. Even at its heyday. 
She bent over with her gag reflex, which she could no longer suppress. Kelpie snorted 
and tossed her head. The unicorn, who appeared beside them, sat on his haunches, jumped 
and kicked. The impact with the hard surface was answered with a loud echo. 
Around them, the night was dark and wrapped them in a choking haze. Ciri looked up to 
get their bearings by the stars, but above her head was nothing but a black vault, just above 
the horizon was illuminated by the red glare of distant fires. 
'Ooops,' she said, when she grinned she felt a sticky, acidic moisture on her lips 'Brrrr. 
Wrong place, wrong time. In the literal sense!' 
The unicorn snorted and shook his head, his horn moved in a short arc. 
The floor grating under Kelpie's hooves was rock, but a strange, and unnaturally even 
which gave off an intense smell of burning ash and dirt. It took a while before Ciri realised 
the maybe it was a road. She was getting the most agonizing shock with each step, therefore 
she turned Kelpie towards the verge lined with something that was perhaps once trees, but 
now only looked like mutilated skeletons, from which hung tattered shreds which reminded 
her of the remanets of rotten shrouds. 
The unicorn warned her with a whinny and a mental signal. But it was too late. 
The dead trees began to slope down and ended at a deep escarpment. Ciri screamed and 
kicked her heels into the mare's sides. Kelpie strained muscles were bunching up and her 
hooves were crushing what was covering – or basically consisted of the slope – garbage, 
mostly some weird empty containers. These containers did not crumple under the horseshoes, 
but broke as if disgustingly soft, like big fish bladders. Each of them gurgled softly and 
emitted a smell that nearly knocked Ciri out of the saddle. Kelpie, neighing furiously, 
stomped up the dump towards the road. Ciri, choking from the stench, clung to the mare's 
neck. 
The made it. The hardness of the unpleasant road was greeted with an odd mixture of joy 
and relief. 
Ciri was still shaking as she looked down the hill. The escarpment ended at a black lake at 
the bottom. Its surface was glossy and motionless, as if there was no water, but was filled 
with pitch. Behind the lake, past mounds of ash and slag heaps the sky glowed with distant 
fires. 
Above the horizon ruddy columns of smoke were rising. 
The unicorn snorted. Ciri wanted to rub her watery eyes on her sleeve, but found that the 
entire sleeve was covered with dust. A layer of dust also covered her thighs, saddle and 
Kelpie's neck and mane. The smell was unbearable. 
'How disgusting,' she muttered. 'Revolting... Let's leave. Let's leave quickly, Horsey.' 
The unicorn pricked up his ears. 
Only you can make that happen. Do it. 
'Me? Alone? Without your help?' 
The unicorn nodded his horn. Ciri scratched her head, sighed and closed her eyes. She 
concentrated. 
First, she felt only suspicion, uncertainty and fear. But soon her mind was awash in a cold 
light – the light of knowledge and power. She had no idea where this source of knowledge 
and the wellspring of power had come from, but she knew she could. She could if she wanted 
to. 
Once again she looked at the motionless dead lake, the steaming heap of waste and the 
skeleton of trees. In the distance the sky was illuminated by the glow of fires. 
'Fine,' she said. 'This is not my world.' 
The unicorn whinnied eloquently. She understood what he wanted to say. 

'And if it's is mine,' she wiped her eyes and nose with a handkerchief, 'then I hope that it 
is infinitely far away in time. Either it's the distant past, or...' 
She stopped. 
'The past,' she said dully after a moment. 'I believe this is the past.' 
 
*** 
 
The heavy rain which greeted them at their next jump was a welcome blessing. The 
downpour smelled of mud, grass and summer and quickly washed away the dirt and dust 
from the dead world. 
After sometime, however, the long cleansing became unbearable. Water spilled down 
Ciri's collar, it soaked her to the skin and started to make her uncomfortably cold. Therefore 
she quickly jumped from the wet place. 
Because it was also not the right place or time. 
 
*** 
 
The next place was very warm, an intense heat prevailed there, so Ciri, Kelpie and the 
unicorn dried very quickly and the water vanished off of them like vapour from a teapot. 
They were in a heath ravaged by the sun on the edge of a forest. The could immediately see it 
was a great forest, a dense forest, wild and incredibly thick. 
In the throbbing heat, Ciri hoped this might be the forest of Brokilon and finally a known 
location. 
They rode slowly around the edge of the forest. Ciri looked for anything that could 
determine where they were. The unicorn snorted, lifted his horned lead and looked around, 
sniffing. He was restless. 
'Do you think, Horsey,' she said, 'that they can chase us?' 
His snort was clear and unambiguous, even without the telepathy. 
'Have we not managed to escape far enough yet?' 
The thought that he sent her she didn't understand. Not far away and not close? What 
does that mean? The Spiral? What spiral? 
She did not understand what he meant. But she understood his anxiety. 
The hot heath was not the right place and not the right time. 
They realised that night, when the heat had yielded and in the sky over the forest 
appeared not one moon, but two. One large and one small. 
 
*** 
 
The next place was at the edge of a sea, on a very steep cliff from which doves were 
spread out on strangely shaped rocks. The wind smelled of the ocean, shrieking terns, gulls 
and petrels and white layer covered the rocky terraces. The sea reached to the horizon, 
framed by dark clouds. 
Down on a stony beach, Ciri could suddenly distinguish the skeleton of a giant monstrous 
fish head partly buried in the gravel. The teeth that protruded from the white jaw were over 
three feet in length and the jaw itself gave the sense that one could going riding through the 
portal of the ribs without ever touching the head or spine. 
Ciri was not sure if this was her world or her time as there were fish like that there as 
well. 
They walked along the edge of the cliff. Seagulls and albatrosses did not seem frightened 
at all, they did not move out of the way, they even pecked and slashed their beaks at Kelpie 

and Ihuarraquax. Ciri knew that these birds had never seen a horse or unicorn. Or humans 
either. 
Ihuarraquax snorted, shook his head and horn and was visibly uneasy. 
He turned out to be correct. Something snapped, like the sound of torn fabric. The gulls 
rose with a shriek and a flutter, covering everything instantly in a cloud of white feathers. The 
air over the cliff suddenly trembled and became cloudy and broke like glass. 
From the crack and darkness emerged riders. Behind them blew coats, whose colour 
resembled the reflection in the sky from the setting sun. 
Dearg Ruadhri. The Red Riders. 
Even before the screaming birds and the warning neigh, Ciri, Kelpie and the unicorn 
turned to flee. But the air had already cracked on the other side of them and from the crack 
spilled riders. The pursuers formed a semicircle around them and closed, pushing Ciri closed 
to the abyss. She screamed and pulled her sword from its sheath. 
The unicorn sent her a strong signal that pierced her brain like a needle. Ciri understood 
immediately. He showed her the way. There was a hole in the skirmish line. The unicorn 
whinnied menacingly and threw himself against the elves. 
'Horsey!' 
Save yourself, Star Eyes! Do not allow yourself to be caught. 
She clung to Kelpie's mane. 
Two elves cut across her path. They held long poles with rope loops at the end. They tried 
to throw them around Kelpie's neck. The first loop, the mare gracefully ducked her head 
under, without slowing in the least. The second loop was severed by a swing from Ciri's 
sword. The mare swept between the elves like a storm. 
But other pursuers were already on her heels, Ciri hear their cries and the clatter of 
hooves. What happened to Horsey? What did he do? 
She had no time for reflection. The unicorn was right, she could not allow herself to be 
caught. She had to escape into space, hide and lose them in the maze of places and times. 
When she tried to concentrate, she felt panic, because in her head she suddenly found a 
strange emptiness and rapidly growing confusion. 
They are casting a spell on me, she thought. They want to deceive me with spells. But 
even spells have a limited range. I cannot let them get to me. 
'Run, Kelpie!' 
The black mare stretched her neck and flew like the wind. Ciri stuck to her neck to 
provide the minimum of wind resistance. 
The shouts behind the, which only a moment before had been loud and dangerously close, 
faded and were drowned out by the cries of frightened birds. Then complete silence. 
Kelpie ran like a storm. The sea wind howled through their ears. 
In the distant cries of their pursuers came a note of anger. They had realised that they 
were not going to catch her. They were never going to reach the black mare galloping without 
any signs of tiredness, light, soft and elastic like a cheetah. 
Ciri did not look back. She knew that her pursuers would still be following. They would 
follow until their own horses began to snort, wheeze and stumble almost to the ground, with 
their mouths open and full of foam. Only then would they stop following her and shout curses 
and impotent threats. 
Kelpie ran like the wind. 
 
*** 
 

The place to where she escaped was dry and windy. The prickly wind quickly dried the 
tears on her face. She was alone. Alone again. A tramp, and eternal pilgrim, a swimmer 
wandering the endless oceans between the islands, of places and time. 
A swimmer losing hope. 
The wind whistles and moaned and rushed over the cracked earth and clumps of weeks. 
The wind dried her tears. 
 
*** 
 
Inside her head a cool brightness murmured in her ears, the constant murmur of the heart 
of a sea shell. There was a burning sensation in her throat. Black soft nothingness. 
A new place and time, another place and time. The islands of places and times. 
 
*** 
 
'Tonight,' Nimue said, wrapping herself in fur, 'will be a good night. I can feel it.' 
Condwiramurs said nothing, although she had heard similar assurances several times. It 
was not the first night that they had sat on the balcony in front of them the shining lake and 
the setting sun, behind them the magic mirror and the magical tapestry. 
From the lake echo the curses from the fisher King, who did not hesitate in voicing his 
distaste for fishing failures. According to his repertoire, it was possible to conclude that today 
he had been extremely successful. 
'Time,' said Nimue, 'has no beginning and no end. It is like the serpent Ouroboros, which 
holds in its teeth its own tail. Every moment hides eternity and eternity is made up of 
moments. Eternity is an archipelago of moments, which can float, but navigation is extremely 
difficult and deviation from the course is dangerous. It is good to have a beacon that can light 
the way in the darkness, to hear a cry through the fog...' 
She paused for a moment. 
'How do we end this interesting legend? It seems to us, you and me, we know how it 
ends. But Ouroboros still keeps his teeth in his own tail and how the legend ends will be 
decided in this moment. It just depends on whether the wandering swimmer sees or hears the 
beacon through the fog.' 
From the lake they could hear more swearing, splashing water and the creaking of oars. 
'Tonight will be a good night. The last before the summer solstice. The moon wanes, the 
sun enters the fourth house, enters the sign of Capricorn. The best time to dream. 
Concentrate, Condwiramurs.' 
Like so many times before, Condwiramurs obediently focused until falling into a trace-
like state. 
'Find her,' said Nimue. 'She is somewhere between the stars, somewhere in the 
moonlight, between the islands of places and times. She is alone. She needs help. Help her 
Condwiramurs.' 
 
*** 
 
Concentration, fist on her temples. In her ears the sound like from inside a conch shell. A 
flash. And suddenly soft, black nothingness. 
 
*** 
 

She was in a place where Ciri could see flaming piles. The women who were in them 
were chained to stakes, begging for mercy, but the crowd laughed, cheered and danced. She 
was in a place where a great city was burning, the flames leapt from collapsing roofs and 
black smoke covered the sky. She was in a place where giant lizards fought and the wounds 
from their terrible teeth and claws flowed with blood. She was in a place where hundreds of 
identical white windmills intersected the air with slender blades. She was in a place where the 
stones rustled and rattled with the sounds of scales and the hissing of thousands of snakes. 
She was in place where they was only darkness and in the darkness, voices whispered in fear. 
She was in a lot of other places. But none of them were right. 
 
*** 
 
She transported from place to place and it was going so well she decided to started a little 
experiment. One of the few places where she was not afraid was the heated hearth on the 
edge of the forest. She summoned a memory of the sight of the two moons and repeated this 
in her mind that this is what she wanted. Ciri concentrated, strained and plunged into 
nothingness. 
She succeed on the second try. 
The success gave her confidence and encouraged her to an even more daring attempt. It 
was clear that part from visiting different places, she could also visit different times, 
Vysogota and the elves and mentioned it and so had the unicorns. 
She did it, albeit unknowingly, earlier. When she had been wounded in the face she 
escaped her enemies by jumping to another time. She transported herself four days ahead, and 
when Vysogota calculated the days, it didn't fit... 
So maybe it was her chance? To jump through time? 
She decided to try it. The burning city for example, would not burn eternally. What if she 
got there before the fire? Or after? 
She jumped right into the center of the fire. Arousing panic among the refugees who ran 
from their houses, scorching her lashes and eyebrows. 
She escaped to the friendly heath. It is not worth risking it this way, she thought, the devil 
knows what could happen. I'll stick to the proven method of jumps between different places, 
but I'll try to get to places that I can remember. One where I was safe. 
She started with the temple of Melitele, imagining the gate, the building, the parks and 
workshops, the dormitories of the adepts, the room in which she lived with Yennefer. 
She focused on the temple recalled the faces of Nenneke, Eurneid, Katye and Iola the 
Second. 
It did not work. She jumped into a swamp full of mosquitoes where the whistle of turtles 
resounded and frogs croaked. 
After she tried – without success – Kaer Morhen, the Skellige islands and the bank in 
Gors Velen where Fabio Sachs worked. She did not dare try and enter Cintra, she knew the 
city was occupied by the Nilfgaardians. Instead she attempted Vizima, the city where she and 
Yennefer went shopping once. 
 
*** 
 
Aarhenius Krantz, a sage, alchemist, astronomer and astrologer, squirmed on his hard 
stood with his eye pressed against the eyepiece of a telescope. The first magnitude comet, 
which would only be in the sky for a week, was necessary to study and describe. The learned 
astrologer knew that such a comet with a fiery red tail predicted great misfortune, war and 
bloodshed. In truth, this time the comet was a little late, because the war with Nilfgaard had 

already stretched for a long time and bloodshed could be reliably predicted without celestial 
phenomena. But Aarehnius Krantz was thoroughly familiar with the movement of the comet 
and so he was going to calculate how many years or centuries until the comet returned, 
heralding a new war, to which, who know, they will be better prepared than the current one. 
The astronomer rose, rubbed his backside and went to relieve his bladder, over the side of 
the terrace. He always pissed for the terrace directly into the bed of peonies, regardless of the 
owners reprimands. The toilet was just too far away, the time wasted in the long march there 
would make him risk losing valuable observations, an no scientist could afford that. 
He stood at the railing, undid his pants and looked at the reflection of Vizima's lights in 
the lake. He sighed in relief and raised his eyes to the stars/ 
The stars, he thought, and constellations. Lady Winter, The Seven goats, the Pitcher. 
According to some theories they are not just blinking light, but worlds. Other worlds. Worlds, 
which are separated from us by time and space... I firmly believe, that it will be possible to 
travel to these other places, to those other times and cosmos. Yes, certainly it will be possible 
one day. There is a way. But this will require whole new ideas, new and refreshing ideas that 
will burst the dogma of today... 
Ah, he thought, if only it were possible... Attaining enlightenment, finding clues! If I 
found one unique occasion... 
Below, next to the terrace, something shone, the dark night burst like a star and with a 
pop there appeared a horse, with a rider on its back. The rider was a girl. 
'Good evening,' she greeted politely. 'I apologise if it is late. Could you tell me what this 
place is? And the date?' 
Aarhenius Krantz gulped gasped and spluttered. 
'The place?' the girl repeated patiently. 'The date.' 
'Aha... This... Ahh...' 
The horse snorted. The girl sighed. 
'We are in the wrong place, I failed again. Wrong place, wrong time! But try to answer 
me man! At least one intelligible word. Because I've never found a world where people have 
forgotten how to speak!' 
'Er...' 
'Just one word.' 
'Er...' 
'Damn you, fucking idiot,' said the girl. 
And the disappeared. Along with the horse. 
Aarhenius Krantz shut his mouth. He remained standing for a moment beside the railing, 
staring into the night, into the lake which reflected Vizima's lights. The he tied up his pants 
and returned to his telescope. 
The comet crossed the sky at full speed. It needed to be constantly monitored, without 
looking away from the eyepiece. It needed to be watched until it disappeared into the depth of 
space. That was the unique opportunity that no true scholar must squander. 
 
*** 
 
I'll try another way, she thought as she watched the two moons. It was now seen as two 
narrow crescents, one bigger and one smaller. I'll try it another way, I've tried imagining a 
place or a face, Now I'll try a powerful desire. I wish strongly, from my heart... 
What's the harm in trying? 
Geralt. I want Geralt. I really want Geralt. 
 
*** 

 
'Oh no,' she cried. 'The devil take me!' 
Kelpie neighed confirmed her felt the same way. Steam exploded from his nostrils and his 
hooves sank into the snow. 
The storm howled, blinding them with sharp ice crystals that hacked at their faces. Cold 
penetrated her clothing and bit like a wolf. Ciri was shaking, stooping her shoulder and her 
neck, trying to hide herself in her raised collar. 
To the right and left loomed majestic peaks, granite monuments, whose peaks bathed in 
the blizzard. In a valley a rushing river was rushing and thick with ice. Everywhere was 
white. 
 I have these abilities, Ciri thought, such power. I'm the Lady of the Worlds but there is 
no point! I wanted Geralt and I find myself lost in the wilderness, in winter in a blizzard. 
'Come, Kelpie, move or you'll freeze!' she pulled on the reins with fingers that were 
numb with cold. 'Come on, bullhead! I know that this is the wrong place, now we'll return to 
our warm heath. But I have to concentrate and it takes some time. So, move!' 
The mare exhaled a cloud of steam. 
The wind blew; snow fell on her face and froze her eyelashes. The wind howled and 
whistled. 
 
*** 
 
'Look!' Angouleme shouted above the wind. 'Look there! There are hoof prints. 
Someone was here!' 
'What did you say?' Geralt moved the scarf which he had around his head to avoid his 
ears freezing. 'What, Angouleme?' 
'Footprints! Hoof prints!' 
'Who could bring a horse here?' Cahir also had to scream above the river Sansretour, 
which thundered and echoed. 'How can you get a horse up here?' 
'Look for yourself?' 
'Indeed,' said the vampire, the only member of the company that showed no symptoms of 
freezing, obviously had equal susceptibility to low and high temperatures. 'They're tracks. 
But are they really from a horse?' 
'Certainly not,' said Cahir running his cheeks and nose. 'Not in this wilderness. It must 
have been some wild animal. Probably an ibex.' 
'You're an ibex, you stupid goat!' shouted Angouleme. 'When I say it was a horse, it was 
a horse!' 
Milva, as usual, preferred practice to theory. She jumped from her saddle and knelt, 
throwing back her hood. 
'The brat is right, it is definitely a horse. Perhaps even shod, but it's hard to say. The wind 
has blown away a lot of traces. They went there into that ravine.' 
'Ha!' Angouleme rubbed her hands together. 'I knew it! Someone lives here! Let's follow 
their trail maybe we'll find a warm cottage. Maybe they have a fire? Perhaps they'll welcome 
us?' 
'Perhaps with an arrow from a crossbow,' Cahir added sarcastically. 
'It would be wiser to stick to the plan of following the river,' Regis decreed in his 
omniscient voice. 'We will not run the risk of getting lost. And along the shore of the 
Sansretour there are trading posts we can fall back on.' 
'What do you think, Geralt?' 
The witcher was silent, staring into the swirling snowstorm. 
'We'll follow the tracks,' he said finally. 

'I do not...' the vampire begun, but Geralt did not let him finish. 
'We'll follow the tracks! Let's go,' he ordered. 
The spurred their horses, but did not travel too far. They had gone into the ravine about a 
quarter mile. 
'They've ended,' Angouleme said, looking down at the pristine snow. 'The horse has 
disappeared like in an Elvish circus.' 
'What now, witcher?' Cahir turned in his saddle. 'The tracks have disappeared. The wind 
has covered them.' 
'No,' disagreed Milva. 'The storm isn't blowing hard enough in the ravine to hide tracks.' 
 'So what happened to the horse?' 
The archer shrugged and huddled up in her saddle. 
'Where is the horse?' Cahir did not give up. 'Did it fly away? Vanish? Or are we just 
dreaming?' 
The storm wailed over the ravine. 
'Why,' asked the vampire, staring with profound insight at the witcher. 'Why did you 
lead us after the tracks, Geralt?' 
'I don't know,' Geralt admitted reluctantly. 'Something... I felt something. Something I 
knew. It doesn't matter. You were right, Regis. Let's return to the Sansretour and stick close 
to the river. No more side trips along the way. According to what Reynart said, real winter 
and bad weather are waiting for us just beyond the pass of Malhuer. When we get there, we 
will need to be at full strength. Don't just stand there, let's go.' 
'But what happened to the horse?' 
'What's happened to him?' muttered the witcher. 'His footsteps have been covered by the 
snow. Or maybe it wasn't a horse, but an ibex.' 
Milva looked at him wryly, but refrained from making any comment. 
When they returned to the river, the mysterious tracks were gone, covered by wet snow. 
The steel-grey Sansretour river flowed thickly with ice which twirled and twisted in the 
water. 
'I will tell you something,' Angouleme said. 'But you have to promise that you are not 
going to laugh.' 
They turned to face her. Covered with a woollen cap pulled down over her ears, with 
cheeks and nose red from the cold, wearing a large coat, the girl looked funny, just like a 
pudgy little kobold. 
'It is about those tracks. When I was riding with Nightingale, in his Hanse, they said that 
in winter along the mountain passes, on an enchanted horse, rides the King of the Mountain, 
the ruler of the ice demons. To meet him face to face is certain death. What do you say, 
Geralt? Is it possible...' 
'Anything,' he interrupted her. 'Anything is possible in this company. The Malhuer pass 
is ahead of us.' 
The snow whipped and lashed, the wind blowed and among cliffs came the whistling and 
howling of ice demons. 
 
*** 
 
The heath to which she had jumped was not the familiar heath, Ciri knew immediately. 
She did not even have to wait until evening, she was confident that see would not see two 
moons. 
She rode around the edges of the forest and also noticed differences. For example, there 
were many more birches and much less beeches. She had not heard or seen any birds. There 

was among the clumps of heather only dry sand, there used to be a green carpet. Even the 
grasshoppers here were different, frightened by Kelpie's steps. So familiar. And yet... 
Her heart beat faster. She saw a path, overgrown and neglected. Leading into the forest. 
Ciri thoroughly explored the surrounding area and made sure that the path did not end. 
That it did not lead to the woods, but led through it. She wasted no time, kicking her heels 
into her mare and rode into the trees. I'll ride for half a day, she thought, if I don't find 
anything I'll turn around and go the opposite direction, into the heath. 
She walked under the canopy of the trees, looking carefully around her, trying not to miss 
anything important. Thanks to this approach she did not miss the little old man who watched 
her from behind an oak. 
The old man was small, but not hunched. He was wearing a linen shirt and trousers of the 
same material. On his feet he wore enormous, ridiculously looking sandals. In one hand he 
carried a gnarled cane and in the other a wicker basket. Ciri could not clearly see his face as it 
was concealed by a straw hat, from which protruded a sunburned nose and a mattered grey 
beard. 
'Don't be afraid,' she said. 'I won't harm you.' 
Greybeard shifted from behind the oak and took off his hat. His face was round and 
dotted with age spots but vigorous with a little wrinkled brow and a small chin. He had long 
grey hair at the nape of his neck which he had pulled back into a ponytail, but the crown of 
his head was bare, shiny and yellow like a pumpkin. 
She noticed that he was looking at her sword, the hilt of which was protruding over her 
right shoulder. 
'Don't be afraid,' she repeated. 
'Hey, hey!' he said, mumbling a bit. 'Hey, hey, my lady. Gramps is not afraid. Not afraid, 
on no.' 
He smiled. His teeth were big and due to his receding lower jaw, his upper teeth stuck out 
of his mouth. There for his speech was hard to understand. 
'Gramps is not afraid of strangers,' he said. 'Even bandits. Gramps is poor and pitiful. 
Gramps is peaceful, no threat to anyone. Hey!' 
He smiled again. His smile seemed to be comprised of only his front teeth. 
'And you my lady, are you afraid of Gramps?' 
Ciri snorted. 
'I'm not afraid of you.' 
'Hey, hey, hey! Whatever you say!' 
He stepped towards her, leaning on his cane. Kelpie snorted. Ciri pulled on the reins. 
'She does not like strangers,' Ciri warned. 'And she bites.' 
'Hey, hey. Gramps understands. Bad, rude pony! And out of curiosity, where is the lady 
going? Where is she heading?' 
'It's a long story. Where does this path lead?' 
'Hey, Hey! The young lady does not know this?' 
'Do not answer questions with questions, if you please. Where does the path lead> What 
is this place? And what is the date?' 
The old man grinned again, his teeth sticking out like a beavers. 
'Hey, hey, I can see from these questions that my lady has come from far away.' 
'Quite far,' she said indifferently. 'From another...' 
'Time and place,' he finished. 'Gramps knows. Gramps guessed.' 
'How have you guessed? What do you know?' she asked excitedly. 
'Gramps knows much.' 
'Speak!' 

'Is my lady hungry? She said. 'Thirsty? Tired? Gramps will take you to his cottage, give 
you food and drink and let you rest.' 
Ciri had not had time to think about food and rest. Now, the words of the strange old man, 
made her stomach rumble and her tongue stick to the roof of her mouth. The old man looked 
at her from under the brim of his straw hat. 
'Gramps,' he said, 'has food and spring water at his house. And hey for your mare, the 
mare that wants to bite Gramps. Hey, hey, at the house we can talk about places and times... 
It's not far. Will my lady accept the invitation? Will she enjoy Gramps refreshments?' 
Ciri swallowed. 
'Lead on,' 
Gramps turned and walked along the barely visible path, measuring the way with long 
strokes from his cane. Ciri followed him, bowing her head to keep the branches from pulling 
her from the saddle and keeping a firm hand on the reins to stop Kelpie from biting the old 
man or eating his straw hat. 
Despite his claims the cottage was not close at all. When they finally reached his place 
the sun was almost at it zenith. 
Gramps's cottage proved to be a picturesque made of wood, with a roof which had been 
evidently repaired often using the first thing that had come to hand. The walls of the hut were 
covered with what looked like pig skins. In front of the cottage was a wooden structure in the 
shape of a gallows, a low table and a stump with an axe sticking out of it. In the cottage was 
an enclosed fireplace made of stone and clay, on which stood a smoking pot and pan. 
'Gramps's home,' said the old man proudly, 'this is where I live. Here is where I sleep 
and cook food. Come have something to eat. Hey, hey, it is difficult to capture food in the 
forest. Does my lady like the flavour of millet porridge?' 
'I like it,' Ciri swallowed again. 'I like it.' 
'With pork? With butter? And bacon?' 
'Mmmm.' 
'It is clear,' the old man gave her a probing look, 'that you have not recently filled a plate 
full of pork and bacon. My lady is skinny. Skin and bones. Hey, hey. What is that back 
there?' 
Ciri looked back. She fell for the old and most primitive trick in the world. 
The heavy blow from the cane hit her directly in the head, her reflexes were just enough 
to raise her hand and cushion some of the blow which could have broken her skull like an 
egg. But Ciri found herself bewildered, stunned and complete disoriented. 
Gramps showed his huge teeth then leapt at her and hit her again with his gnarled stick. 
Ciri once again managed to protect her head with her upraised hands, but the result was her 
left hand falling limp, probably broken. Gramps jumped to her other side and swung, hitting 
her in the stomach. She screamed and curled into a ball. He threw himself on her like a hawk; 
he turned her face to the ground and crushed her knees. Ciri arched up and kicked back, 
hitting him a sharp blow to his elbow. Gramps roared furiously and slammed his fist onto the 
back of her head with such force that her face dug into the sand. He grabbed her by the hair 
on her neck and ground her nose and mouth into the sand. She felt suffocated. 
The old man knelt on her, still pushing her head into the ground, pulled out her sword and 
tossed it to the side. He fumbling hand reach over her stomach and unlaced her pants. Ciri 
screamed and her mouth filled with more sand. The old man pushed harder, clutching her hair 
in his fist. With a strong tug her pulled down her pants. 
'Hey, hey,' the old man wheezed. 'Today Gramps caught a nice ass. It has been a long 
time.' 
Ciri felt the touch of his dry hand and cried out again through her mouth full of sand and 
pine needles. 

'Just be quiet and lay still, my lady,' he drooled onto her buttocks. 'Gramps is no longer 
young, like he used to be... But no fear, the old man still knows what to do. Hey, hey, and 
then Gramps will eat you...' 
He did not finish the sentence, he grunted and roared. 
Ciri felt his grip break, and broke away from him like a spring. Now she could see what 
had happened. 
Kelpie had silently crept up from behind, grabbed Gramps in her teeth and literally lifted 
him off the ground. The old man yelled and thrashed about, kicking. Finally he managed to 
break free, but left a lot of his grey hair in the mare's teeth. He leaped for his gnarled stick 
but at the last moment Ciri kicked it out of his reach. The second kick she wanted to deal out 
was to where it was necessary, but her pants pulled down to her knees restricted her 
movements. She pulled them up and turned, but Gramps had utilised the lost time well. With 
several jumps he reached the stump and wrested the axe from it. He waved the axe, driving 
Kelpie back, then with a roar, he lunged at Ciri, raising the axe to strike. 
'Gramps is gonna bugger you wench!' he howled wildly. 'Even if he has to hack you to 
pieces first. Gramps doesn't care if my lady is whole or filleted!' 
Ciri thought that she could handle his easily. He was after all, a decrepit old man. She was 
mistaken. 
Despite his age and large sandals, he was as agile as a rabbit and leaped at her, 
brandishing the axe with the skill of a butcher. When the sharpened blade almost hit her a few 
times, Ciri realised that the only way to save herself was to escape. 
But she was save by coincidence. Stepping backwards she ran into her sword. She quickly 
picked it up. 
'Throw down the axe,' she yelled, pulling her sword with a hiss from its scabbard. 
'Throw down your axe, you old shit, maybe I'll give you your life.' 
He paused. Wheezing and puffing, he had saliva running from his mouth into his beard. 
But he did not throw down the axe. She saw in his eyes a murderous rage. 
'No!' 
'Then come at me.' 
For a moment he looked at her as if not understanding, then he gnashed his teeth, roared 
and lunged at her. Ciri had had enough. She turned quickly and cut up from the bottom 
slicing his arms above the elbow. The old man dropped the axe and his bloody hands 
followed, he immediately jumped at her again. She jumped and slashed him across the neck. 
More out of pity than necessity, the open arteries in his arms would have bled out in a few 
moments. 
He lay there, parting with life with incredible difficulty, without his severed limbs, he 
squirmed like a worm. Ciri stood over him. In her teeth, sand gritted. She spat it out on the 
dying old man. Before the saliva hit him, he died. 
 
 *** 
 
The strange construction in front of the cottage that resembled a scaffold was decorated 
with iron hooks and rigging. The table and the stump were slippery, covered in grease and 
smelled. Like a slaughterhouse. 
In the kitchen Ciri found a the millet porridge, full of pieces of meat and mushrooms. She 
was very hungry, but something stopped her from eating it. Instead she drank only a little 
water from a jug and at a small wrinkled apple. 
Some stairs descended deep into a cool cellar. The shelves were stored with earthenware 
pots and lard. Meat hung from the ceiling. Some remnants of a thing. 

She ran from the cellar, as if chased by demons, She fell into the nettles and rose, 
staggering away from the cottage. Despite having an empty stomach, she vomited violently 
for a long time. 
The thigh hanging in the cellar belonged to a child. 
 
*** 
 
Driven by a stench, she found a pit whose bottom was half flooded with water were 
Gramps threw his garbage, everything that he did not eat. Looking at the skulls, ribs and 
pelvis rolling in the mud, Ciri realised with horror that she had survived only because of the 
old man's lust, he wanted to rape more than he wanted food. If his hunger at that moment had 
been stronger that his lustful appetites, he would have treacherously struck her with the axe 
and not the gnarled stick. He would have hung her by her feet on the wooden gallows, gutted 
her, pulled off her skin and chopped her up on the table... 
Although her legs were shaking with weakness and her left hand throbbed with pain, she 
dragged the body into the forest and plunged it into the stinking mud, between the bones of 
his victims. She returned to the cottage with branches and dried twigs and placed them 
around the four sides of the house. The carefully set fire to all four sides. 
She left when the fire had flared up properly. When she felt the heat, heard the roar and 
when she was sure that a random shower would not prevent the razing of this place. 
 
*** 
 
Her hand was not so bad. It was swollen, yes, and it hurt, but there didn't sem to be any 
broken bones. 
When evening came, a single moon appeared in the sky. However Ciri did not want to 
accept this world as her own. 
Or stay in in any longer than necessary. 
 
*** 
 
'Tonight,' Nimue whispered, 'will be a good night. I can feel it.' 
Condwiramurs sighed. 
The horizon burned in gold and purple. A beam of the same colours settled on the lake. 
They were sitting on the terrace in chairs, behind them was a mirror in an ebony frame 
and a tapestry depicting a small castle clinging to a rocky wall which was reflected in the 
water of a mountain lake. 
How many evenings, Condwiramurs thought, will we sit up in the falling twilight and the 
darkness? Without any results? Just talking? 
It got colder. The sorceress and the adept were wrapped in furs. From the lake came the 
creak of oars from the boat of the Fisher King, but they could not see it as it was hidden by 
the blinding glow of sunset. 
'Quite often I dream,' Condwiramurs said, 'I'm in an icy wasteland, where there is 
nothing but piled of white snow and the sun sparkling on ice. And there is silence, silence 
calling in my ears. Unnatural silence. The silence of death.' 
Nimue nodded, as if she knew what this meant. But she said nothing. 
'Suddenly, it seems that I can hear something,' continued the adept. 'I can feel the surface 
of the ice tremble under my feet. I kneel down in the snow. The ice is clear as glass, it is from 
a mountain lake, stones and fish can be seen through the thick pane. In my dream, I can also 

see that, the layer of ice is dozens or perhaps hundreds of inches thick. This does not prevent 
me from hearing... people screaming for help. Below the ice... there is a frozen world.' 
Nimue remained silent. 
'Of course, I know,' said the adept, 'the dream is born from Ithlinne's Prophecy, the 
famous White Winter, the Time of the White Frost, the time of the Wolf Blizzard. The world 
has perished under snow and ice that is the forecast of re-birth. Pure and better.' 
'I deeply believe that,' Nimue said softly, 'it will regenerate the world. But not that it 
would be better.' 
'What?' 
'You heard me.' 
'I did not mishear? Nimue, the Time of the White frost has been predicted many times, 
every cold winter; people believe that it is beginning. But today not even children believe that 
some long winter will destroy the world.' 
'So you can see, children do not believe, but I do.' 
'do you have some rational reasons,' Condwiramurs said with slight irony, 'or is it a 
mystical belief in the infallibility of elven prophecies?' 
Nimue's fingers twitched among the fur in which she was shrouded. 
'Our world,' she began in her mentoring tone, 'has the shape of a sphere and revolves 
around the sun. Do you agree or do you belong to one of those tiny sects that believe the 
opposite?' 
'No, I'm not one of them. I accept the heliocentric doctrine and believe that the earth is 
round.' 
'Good. Then you know that the earth's axis is tilted and the track the earth takes around 
the sun is not circular, but elliptical?' 
'I've learned about it. But I am not an astronomer, so...' 
'There is no need to be an astronomer, just think logically. The earth moves around the 
sun in an elliptical shaped orbit and so during its movements it is sometimes closer and 
sometimes further away. The further the earth is from the sun, it is logical to think that the 
colder it will be. And thanks to the planetary axis the northern hemisphere is further from the 
light.' 
'This is logical.' 
'Both aspects – the ellipse of the orbit and the inclination of the axis are subject to 
change. Believed to be cyclic. The ellipse can be more or less elliptical, elongated or 
shallower, the axis also experiences changes. Due to the distance from the Sun and the large 
tilt of the earth's axis, the polar regions receive very little light and heat.' 
'I understand.' 
'Less light in the northern hemisphere means more residual snow. The white glistening 
snow reflects sunlight so the temperature drops even more. The snow remains even longer, 
the larger tracts do not melt, or only briefly. The more snow, the more residual, the more 
white and shiny reflective surface...' 
'I understand.' 
'The snow falls and falls and there becomes more and more of it. Note that, the sea 
currents migrate from the south of the warm air. Humidity condenses over the cold areas and 
causes further snow to fall. The greater the temperature differences, the more abundant the 
snowfall. It gets colder.' 
'I understand.' 
'The snow becomes so heavy the ice becomes pressed and forms a glacier. On which, as 
we know, the snow keeps falling, squeezing it even more, the glacier grows, not only 
increasingly thick but covering more space. White spaces...' 

'That reflects the sunlight,' Condwiramurs nodded. 'Getting colder and colder still. The 
White Light that Ithlinne prophesied. But can this really lead to a cataclysm? Can the ice that 
likes to the north suddenly start moving south, crushing and covering everything? How 
quickly can the ice at the poles grow? How many inches a year?' 
'As you probably know,' Nimue said staring at the lake, 'the only port that does not 
freeze is the Gulf of Praxeda in Pont Vanis.' 
'I know.' 
'Enrich your knowledge. You know that a hundred years ago, all the major ports in the 
Gulf were open water throughout the year. In the Chronicles it is recorded that even in the 
last century that Talgar could still grow cucumbers and pumpkins and sunflowers. Now those 
crops won't grow there, because the growing season is too short and the winter is too rigid. 
Did you ever hear that Kaedwen had its own vineyard? Wines from the local vines were 
probably not the best, but they were cheap. And the local poets sang of them. Those vines no 
longer grow in Kaedwen because the winters, unlike the old, bring severe frosts and heavy 
snows that kill the vines. Not only inhibits the vegetation, but simply kills it. Destroys it.' 
'I understand.' 
'Yes,' reflected Nimue. 'Shall I tell you more? Perhaps of the snow falls in Talgar in mid-
November. And at the end of December and January, there is snow in the catchment area of 
Alba, where even a hundred years ago nobody had seen snow. Why at Birke do we celebrate 
the welcoming of spring, what do you think?' 
'It's the spring equinox. But it is true that the little children wonder, because outside there 
is still snow on the ground. At the same time I have read that in ancient times that during 
Birke daffodils and crocuses had already bloomed.' 
'You mean the ancient times, not more than a hundred and twenty years ago. Historically 
it has been recently. Ithlinne was right, the prophecy is fulfilling. The world is perishing 
under the ice. Mankind will perish because of the Destroyer, who was to open the way to 
salvation. As we know from legend, he did not.' 
'For reasons that are not explained in the legend.' 
'That is true. However, the fact remains, the White Frost is coming. The civilizations of 
the northern hemisphere are doomed. They will disappear under the sprawling ice, under 
permafrost and snow. But there is no need to panic, because it will take some time before it 
happens.' 
The Sun went down and the blinding brilliance from the surface of the lake disappeared. 
Now a softer beam of light fell on the water. The moon bathed the tower of Inis Vitre in a 
bright glow. 
'How long?' said Condwiramurs. 'How long do we have left, do you think? ' 
'A lot.' 
'How much, Nimue?' 
'About three thousand years.' 
Somewhere on the lake, the Fisher King struck himself with the oar and cursed loudly. 
Nimue shook her head. Condwiramurs sighed. 
'I've calmed down a bit. But only a little.' 
 
*** 
 
The next place was one of the most horrible that Ciri had seen, it certainly placed in the 
top ten, and maybe even ahead of them. It was a port, she saw boats and galleys with springs 
and lines, she saw a forest of masts and saw sails hanging heavy in the still air. Around her 
twisted columns of smoke, smelly smoke. 

The smoke rose from crooked huts also standing along the port. In them she heard voices, 
the sound of crying children. 
Kelpie jumped, pulling hard on the reins and hitting her hooves hard on the cobblestones. 
Ciri looked down and saw dead rats. They were everywhere, some of the rodents were dead, 
other writhing in pain, with pale pink legs. 
Something is not right, she thought, suddenly feeling panic. Flee, run away from here as 
quickly as possible. 
Next to a pole where fishing nets hung a man was sitting on the ground. His shirt was torn 
across the chest, his head was laying on his shoulder. He did not look like he was sleeping. A 
few steps further on lay more people. The did not move when Kelpie's horseshoes tinkled on 
the pavement right next to their heads. Ciri bent so that she could pass under clothes hanging 
on a clothesline. They reeked of the staleness of dirt. 
At the door to one of the huts was a cross painted with lime or white paint. Behind its 
roof, black smoke rode into the blue sky. A child was crying, someone shouted in the 
distance, someone closer was coughing and snorting. A dog howled. 
Ciri's hands felt itchy. She looked down. 
Her hands were covered in black fleas. 
She screamed aloud. Trembling with fear and disgust, she became to violently wave her 
arms. She startled Kelpie, who took off at a gallop, Ciri nearly fell off. Clutching the side of 
the mare with her thighs she combed her fingers through her hair, ruffling it. She tore at her 
jacket and shirt. Kelpie continued to gallop through the smoke that blew across the street. Ciri 
screamed in horror. 
She was going through hell, the inferno, the most terrible of nightmares. Among the 
houses marked with white crosses. Among smouldering rags. Among the dead lying alone 
and those who were lying in piles, one on the other. And among the living, ragged, half-
naked ghouls with sunken cheeks, crawling through the muck, screaming in a language she 
did not understand, stretching out their emaciated arms, covered in horrible bloody 
pustules... 
Run! Run away from here! 
Even in the black nothingness of nonexistence of the archipelago of places, Ciri smelt for 
a long time in her nostrils the smoke and the stench. 
 
*** 
 
The next place was also a port. But here I was spring and it had a channel, and in the 
channel were boats, scooters, yachts and a forest of masts. But in this place of masts, there 
were screaming gulls and it smelled of joyous normal home – wet wood, seawater and fish. 
On the deck of a boat, two men were fighting, screaming with excited voices. 
She understood everything that they were saying. 
They were arguing over the price of herring. 
Not far away stood a tavern, and from its doors came the musty smell of beer and loud 
voices, laughter and the clinking of glasses. Someone was singing a loud obscene song. 
 
Luned, c'ard t'elaine arse 
Aen a meath ail aen sparse! 
 
She knew where she was. Before she read the name on the stern of one of the galleys – 
Evall Muire. And it port of origin – Baccala. She knew where she was. 
In Nilfgaard. 
She fled before anyone paid her any attention. 

However, before she was immersed into nothingness, a flea, which had jumped on her 
shirt at the last place and followed her through space and time, jumped from her shirt onto the 
pier. 
The flea settled onto the bare skin of a rat, an old male mousy veteran of many wars, 
which was testified by his torn ear. That evening the rat and flea boarded a vessel. And the 
next morning they sailed the high seas. The ship they boarded was old and dirty and bore the 
name "Catriona". That name would go down in history. But nobody knew anything about that 
yet. 
 
*** 
 
The next place, though she could hardly believe it, surprised her with a truly idyllic 
image. It was a quiet riverside, with a lazy stream flowing among the willows, alders and 
oaks which leant over the water. Next to a bridge with a delicate stone arch linking the two 
shores stood a wild vine covered inn. 
Above the door swung a sign with large gold letter, which Ciri did not know how to read. 
However, because of the inscription of a shield also nicely illustrated with a black cat on it, 
Ciri decided to call the tavern "The Black Cat". 
Flowing from the tavern was the smell of food. Ciri almost fell into a swoon. It didn't 
take her long to decide. She adjusted the sword on her back and stepped inside. 
The tap room was empty, only one table sat three men, who at first glance appeared to be 
villagers. They did not even look at Ciri who out of habit sat in a corner with her back to the 
wall. 
The landlady, a stout woman with a spotless apron and a cap, came up to her and asked 
something. Her voice was thunderous but melodious. Ciri poked one finger towards her 
mouth and patted her stomach, then took a silver button from her blouse and laid it on the 
table. Seeing the surprised expression on the woman's face she was about to pluck a second 
button, but the woman stopped her with a gesture. 
The silver button provided her with a heavy casserole and vegetable soup, a pot of timber 
beans and smoked meat, bread and a jug of watered wine. 
From the first tablespoon, Ciri thought she was going to cry. But she controlled herself. 
She ate slowly. Relishing it all. 
The landlady came over and asked her a ringing question, and put her hands to her cheek. 
She wanted to know if she was staying the night. 
'I don't know,' said Ciri. 'Maybe. In any case, that you for the invitation.' 
The woman smiled and walked into the kitchen. 
Ciri undid her belt and leaned back against the wall. She wondered what to do next. This 
place, in contrast to some previous ones, was pleasant and she was tempted to stay longer. 
However, experience had taught her that excessive confidence can be dangerous and a lack of 
vigilance can be fatal. 
From out of nowhere a black cat appeared, exactly the same as the one on the signboard. 
It arched its back and rubbed itself on her calf. She stroked the cat and he pushed his head 
into her palm, then settled down beside her and began to lick his fur. Ciri watched. 
She saw Jarre sitting next to a fire in a circle with ugly rogues. They all nibbled at 
something that resembled a piece of coal. 
'Jarre?' 
'It has to be this way,' said the boy while watching the dancing flames. 'I read about it in 
the History of War, Marshal Pelligram's work. So it is necessary when the country is in 
danger.' 
'What is necessary? Eating coal?' 

'Yes. Exactly so. The motherland calls. And partly for personal reasons.' 
'Ciri, do not fall asleep in the saddle,' Yennefer said. 'We have arrived.' 
The had arrived at a city, where the doors and gates of the houses had painted white 
crosses on the. They rode into a dense, suffocation smoke, coming from the bodies of the 
dead who were being burned. Yennefer didn't seem to notice. 
'I have to beautify.' 
Before her face, above the ears of her horse appeared mirror. It danced in the air and 
along with a brush that combed her raven tresses. Yennefer only uses magic, and not her 
hands, because... 
Her hands were covered in masses of clotted blood. 
'Mother! What did they do?' 
'Get up, girl,' Coen says. 'Master the pain, get up again on the comb. Otherwise you'll 
catch fear. Do you want to be afraid the rest of your life? ' 
His yellow eyes shine in an unpleasant manner. His sharp, white teeth flash. Then it's not 
Coen. It is a cat, a black cat... 
A column of an army, many miles long, marches above them wave a forest of spears and 
banners. Jarre has a round helmet on his head and a pike on his shoulder, which he has to 
hold with both hands otherwise the weight would unbalance him. Drums and bagpipes echo, 
and thunder the songs of war. Above the column crows fly. Many crows... 
A lake shore, a field of reeds. An island on the lake. On the island a tower with jagged 
battlements. Above the tower, in the darkening evening sky, the moon shines, and makes the 
tower glow. On the balcony is sitting two women wrapped in furs. A man fishes on a boat... 
A tapestry and a mirror. 
Cir lifted her head with a jerk. In front of her sitting at the table is Eredin Breacc Glas. 
'You should know,' he said, grinning with his even teeth, 'that you are only delaying the 
inevitable. You belong to us and we'll find you.' 
'Never.' 
'You will come back to us. You have seen a couple of times and places, but sooner or 
later you'll get to the Sprial. And the Sprial is ours. You will never get back to your world 
and time. After all, it is already too late, you have nothing to return to. The people that you 
knew are long dead, their graves overgrown with grass and their names forgotten. Your name 
too...' 
'You're lying! I do not believe you!' 
'You belief is you thing. But know that soon you will come to the Spiral and I'll be there 
waiting. Admit that you secretly long for me, me elaine luned.' 
'You are delusional!' 
'We, Aen Elle, perceive such things. You were fascinated with me, and you were afraid 
of your desires. You still want me, Zireael. My hands, their touch...' 
He jumped to her feet, overturning her cup, fortunately empty and grabbed her sword. 
She immediately calmed down. She was in the "Black Cat" inn. She had fallen asleep at the 
table. The hand that had touched her hair, was the landlady's. Ciri was not fond of this ind of 
contact, but the woman simply radiated kindness, for which Ciri could not repay with 
rudeness. She allowed her to stroke her head, with a smile and listened to her melodious 
speech. She was tired. 
'I have to go,' she said at last. 
The woman smiled and spoke in her singsong voice. 
How is it possible, thougth Ciri, in all the worlds, places and times, in all languages and 
dialects, this word is always understandable? And always the same? 
'Yes, I have to. My mother is waiting for me.' 

The landlady escorted her into the yard. Before Ciri could jump into the saddle, she 
suddenly hugged her tightly pressing her into her plump breasts. 
'Goodbye. Thank you for your hospitality. Forward, Kelpie.' 
She went straight over the arched bridge over the calm river. When the mare's horseshoes 
rang on the stones, he looked up. The woman was still standing at the front of the inn. 
Concentration, fists on her temples. A noise in her ears like the sound of a sea shell. A 
flash. Soft black nothingness. 
'Good luck, my girl,' Theres Lapin, owner of the pub Au Chat Noir in Pont-sur-Yonne on 
the road from Melun to Auxerre. 
'Godspeed!' 
 
*** 
 
Concentration, fist on her temples. A noise in her ears like the sound of a sea shell. A 
flash. Soft, black nothingness. 
Places. A lake. An island. The moon like a half thaler, it's brilliance glowing over the 
water of a lake. The mast of a boat with a man fishing... 
On the terrace of the tower... Two women? 
 
*** 
 
Condwiramurs could not stand it, she shouted with excitement and then immediately 
covered her mouth with her hand. The Fisher King dropped his nets with a splash and the 
swore terribly then with his mouth open he froze. Nimue did not move. 
On the surface of the lake, on a ray of moonlight Appeared a black horse with a rider on 
her back. 
Minue calmly reached out and shouted a spell. The tapestry on the wall in the room bust 
into multicoloured lights. The lights reflected in the oval mirror, danced on the walls like 
coloured bees and then sailed out of the room like a rainbow, as light as a ribbon that lit up 
the lake like the first rays of dawn. 
The black mare lifted her head and whinnied loudly. Nimue abruptly extended her hands 
and shouted another spell. Condwiramurs saw an image forming in the air, growing more 
tightly focused. The image immediately popped into focus. Then became a portal. A gate, 
beyond which they could see... 
A plain full of shipwrecks. A castle stuck on a sharp cliff, lording over the dark mirror of 
a mountain lake... 
'Over there!' Nimue shouted loudly. 'This is the path that you must follow! Ciri, Pavetta's 
daughter! Enter the portal, follow the path that leads to your meeting with fate! That closes 
the wheel of time! Let Ouroboros bit his own tail. Do not wander anymore! Hurry to help 
your loved ones! This is the right way to go, witcheress!' 
The mare snickered and buried her hooves in the air. The girl in the saddle, turned her 
head, looking alternatively at them and the image produced by the tapestry and mirror. She 
tossed her hair from her face, on which Condwiramurs saw the scar. 
'Believe me, Ciri,' cried Nimue. 'You know me! We've seen each other once already!' 
'I remember,' they heard her answer. 'I believe you. Thank you.' 
They watched her spur the mare towards the portal. Before the image faded, the ashen 
haired girl turned in the saddle and waved. 
Then everything disappeared. The lake was calm, the bar of moonlight settled. It was so 
quiet, they thought they could hear the loud breathing of the Fisher King. 

Nimue refrained from tears and tightly embraced Condwiramurs. She like a little 
trembling fairy. They remained in the embrace for some time. Without words they both 
turned and looked at the place where the Gate of Worlds had disappeared. 
'Godspeed, witcheress!' they cried in unison. 'Good luck on your journey!' 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Not far from the battlefield, where that terrible battle between almost the entire North 
was facing almost all of the aggressor Nilfgaard's power, there were two fishermen villages 
– Old Butts and Brenna. However, since Brenna was burned to the ground, people used to 
talk about the "Battle of Old Butts". Today, however, it is referred to as the "Battle of 
Brenna" for two reasons – First, Brenna is now restored and is now a prosperous settlement, 
while Old Butts was abandoned by its inhabitants a long time ago and is now overgrown with 
nettles and weeds. Secondly – the original name in the context of that grand and tragic 
struggle seemed extremely awkward, as if it were not enough that roughly thirty thousand 
unfortunates gave their lives but with their butts, that were old. 
So, in historical literature the military has taken to calling it the "Battle of Brenna" and 
not just in our writings but in Nilfgaard's who have many more sources than ours. 
 
Reverend Jarre the Elder of Ellander 
Annales seu Cronicae Incliti Regni Temeriae 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

