Chapter Three 
 
 
The monster attacked from the darkness, from its hiding place, quietly and with 
premeditation. It materialised suddenly from the darkness like a fiery explosion. Like a 
tongue of flame. 
Geralt, though surprised, reacted instinctively. He dodged to the side, brushing up against 
the wall of the dungeon. The beast flew by and bounced from the stone wall like a ball, 
waved it wings and jumped again, hissing and opening its horrible beak. 
But this time the witcher was prepared. 
He struck with a short attack from the elbow, aiming at the throat, the red flap of the 
gizzards. He succeeded. He felt the blade penetrate the body. The momentum of the blow 
knocked the monster onto the floor near the wall. The skoffin howled with a cry that almost 
sounded human. It threw itself among the broken bricks, flapping its wings, spewing blood 
and thrashing its tail around like a whip. The witcher was sure the fight was over, but the 
nasty monster gave him an unpleasant surprise. It unexpectedly launched at his throat, 
screeching, showing its claws and snapping it beak. Geralt jumped, bouncing his shoulder 
against the wall and launched a blow from below, using the momentum of the bounce. He 
was successful. The skoffin fell once more between the bricks, its fetid blood spilled down 
the dungeon wall forming a fanciful pattern. The monster shook, screeched and stretched its 
long neck, its throat swell and shook. The blood flowed rapidly from it and disappeared 
among the bricks where it lay. 
Geralt could easily finish it off, but he did not want to destroy the skin. He waited calmly 
until the skoffin bleed to death. He moved a few steps away, undid his pants and took a piss 
while whistling a nostalgic tune. 
The skoffin was silent and still. The witcher moved closer to it and nudged it carefully 
and gently with the tip of his sword. Seeing that it was over, he grabbed the monster by the 
tail and held it up. He held the base of the tail at the height of a human's waist; the skoffin's 
sharp beak reached the ground. Its wing span was just over four feet. 
'You're not particularly heavy,' Geralt shook the monster that weighed no more than a 
fattened turkey. 'Fortunately for me I get paid per piece not by weight.' 
 
*** 
 
'Wow,' Reynart Bois-de Fresnes whistled through his teeth, which for him, Geralt knew, 
meant the highest expression of astonishment and admiration. 'This is the first time I have 
seen something like this with my own eyes. A true monster, on my honour. So this is the 
dreaded basilisk?' 
'No,' Geralt lifted the monster a little higher so the knight would see better. 'It is not a 
basilisk. It is a cockatrice.' 
'So what is the difference?' 
'The essentials. The basilisk is also known as the regulus, is a reptile. The cockatrice, also 
called a skoffin, is an ornithosaur – that is, half reptile, half bird. It is the only representative 
of the subclass, which scientist call Ornithoreptilia and after long disputes they came to the 
conclusion that...' 
'And which of the two,' Reynart Bois-de Fresnes interrupted, apparently without interest 
of the discussions of scientists, 'can kill or turn a man to stone with a glance?' 
'None. Those are stories.' 
'Then why are people so afraid? This thing here isn't so large. Can it be so dangerous?' 

'This thing here,' Geralt shook the dead monster, 'usually attacks from behind and 
without error goes perfectly between the vertebrae or the aorta or under the left kidney. 
Usually all it takes is a single thrust of its beak. With regards to the basilisk, it will kill you no 
matter where it bites; it has the strongest know poison which is a neurotoxin that kills within 
a few moments.' 
'Brrr... Tell me, which one can you kill with a mirror?' 
'All of them. If you slam it hard enough in the head with the mirror.' 
Reynard Bois-de Fresnes burst out laughing. Geralt did not laugh, the joke about the 
basilisk and the mirror was one the teachers in Kaer Morhen repeated often. Equally funny 
were the jokes about virgins and unicorns. There was also a story of foolishness about a 
young witcher from Kaer Morhen who made a bet to shake hands with a dragon. 
He smiled. Memories. 
'I prefer it when you smile,' Reynart said, watching him carefully. 'Like you are at this 
moment. Not like back in October when we first met in the Druidic woods. Back then you 
were gloomy, bitter and resentful at the world like a moneylender who had been cheated, and 
on top of that, like a man who throughout the night has come to nothing. Even in the 
morning.' 
'Really, I was like that?' 
'Really. So do not be surprised that I prefer you such as you are now. Changed.' 
'Therapy through work,' Geralt again shook the cockatrice he held by the tail. 'The 
beneficial effects of exercise on mental health. And to continue the therapy, I'll get straight to 
business. The skoffin can earn more than the agreed upon price for capture. There is little 
damage to it, so you could take it to a taxidermist for stuffing, but do not take less than two 
hundred for it. If you have to sell it in pieces, remember that the most valuable feathers are 
those above the tail, especially these, the central rudders. They are far softer than those of a 
goose and write very nicely and cleanly with little wear. An experienced scribe will not 
hesitate to give you five per pen.' 
'I have clients to collect the body,' the knight smiled. 'The Guild of Coopers. They saw in 
Castel Ravello that stuffed ugly thing, that monster, or whatever you call it... Then you, the 
day after Saovine, went into the basement and killed it.' 
'I remember.' 
'Now the Coopers had seen that stuffed ugly bitch and asked me about obtaining a similar 
rarity to decorate their guild hall. In Toussaint, the Coopers cannot complain about a lack of 
work, and as a result they are prosperous so they will not think much if we charge two 
hundred and twenty for the cockatrice. Maybe even a bit more if we try to haggle. In regards 
to the feathers... They are not going to know if we took some feathers from the things ass to 
sell to the county chancery. The chancery does not pay out of pocket, but the county will pay 
cash, without haggling, not five but ten per pen.' 
'I bow to your cunning.' 
'Nomen omen,' Reynard de Bois-Fresnes' smile broadened. 'My mum must have known 
something, baptising me after the sly fox from the nursery rhyme.' 
'You should be a businessman, not a knight.' 
'I should,' agreed the knight. 'But if you are born the son of a knight, you will die the son 
of a knight and will sire another knight. And it does not change, even if you are broke. You 
know how to count, Geralt, and the culture of the market.' 
'No, not culture. For similar reasons as yours. With the sole difference that I won't be 
siring anything. Let's get out of these dungeons.' 
Outside, beneath the walls of the castle, the frost stung and the wind blew from the 
mountains. The night was a clear and cloudless sky full of stars and the moonlight sparkled 
on the fresh snow. 

The waiting horses snorted in welcome. 
'We could go directly to my customer and make a deal,' said the knight. 'But you 
probably need to get to Beauclair, huh? To a certain bedroom?' 
Geralt did not answer, because he did not respond to such questions on principle. He tied 
the cockatrice onto the back his horse then mounted, Roach. 
'We will visit the customer,' he said. 'The night is still young and I'm hungry. I would 
also like to drink something. Let's go to town. To Pheasantry.' 
The knight laughed and adjusted the red and gold chequered shield hanging on the high 
saddle so he could scramble up. 
'As you wish, my friend. We go to, Pheasantry. Forward mount.' 
They went down the slope to the road lined by a row of poplars. 
'You know what, Reynart,' Geralt suddenly said. 'I like you as you are now. Speaking 
normally. Back when we first met, you used annoying, moronic mannerisms.' 
'Upon my honour, witcher, I am a knight-errant,' chortled the Reynart de Bois-Fresnes. 
'Have you forgotten? Knights always talk like morons. It is as much a part of their character 
as this shield here. Thanks to the speech and the coat of arms we know who belongs to the 
brotherhood.' 
 
*** 
 
'On my honour,' said the Checkerboard Knight, 'you are unnecessarily troubled, Sir 
Geralt. Your companions have certainly returned to health and their injuries forgotten. The 
Duchess has palace doctors in profusion, able to cure every disease. On my honour, there is 
more to discuss.' 
'I am of the same opinion.' said Regis. 'Lighten up, Geralt. After all the Druidess healed 
Milva...' 
'And the Druidess is familiar with treatments,' Cahir interjected. 'The best example is my 
own head. Look, it is as good as new. Milva is certainly healthy already; there is no reason 
for concern.' 
'I hope so.' 
'Healthy already,' repeated the Knight, 'I bet that when we return we will find her 
dancing at all the balls! Feasting! In Beauclair, at the court of the Duchess Anarietta there is 
always continuous dancing and feasting. Ha, ha, on my honour, now that I have fulfilled my 
knightly vow, I am...' 
'You have completed your vow?' 
'I was in the favour of Fortune! I would like to explain that I made an oath. And not just 
any oath, but on the heron. In Spring. I vowed to apprehend five hundred malefactors before 
Yule. I have completed this, so I am relieved. I can once again drink and eat beef. And I do 
not have to hid my name. Let me introduce myself. I am Reynart de Bois-Fresnes.' 
'A pleasure to meet you.' 
'You were talking of balls?' Angouleme said, urging her horse up next to them. 'I hope 
that there will be enough food and drink for us. And I would gladly dance!' 
'On my honour, at the court of Duchess Anna Henrietta, there will be plenty of both,' said 
Reynart de Bois-Fresnes. 'Singing and feasting and performances by jugglers, theatre, 
music, dancing and poetry in the evenings. You're friends of Dandelion... I man, the 
Viscount Julian. And he is very dear to Her Belovedness Our Lady Duchess.' 
'And how long he boasted!' Angouleme said. 'Was there truly an affair with them both? 
Do you know the story, Sir Knight? Tell us!' 
'Angouleme,' said the witcher. 'Do you need to know?' 

'I do not need to. But I want to! Leave off the protesting, Geralt. And stop looking so 
annoyed, otherwise the mushroom pickers will have nothing to do because the sight of your 
mouth will spoil the mushrooms on the roadside. And you, Sir Knight, tell me.' 
The other errant knights who rode at the head of the procession sang a song with a 
repeated refrain. The words of the song were almost unbelievably stupid. 
'It happened,' began the knight, 'six years ago. The poet was a guest at the court during 
the winter and spring, playing his lute, singing romances and declaiming poems. Prince 
Rajmund was at the time in Cintra for the congress. He was in no hurry to get back home; 
there was no secret that he kept a courtesan in Cintra. The Duchess Anarietta and Mister 
Dandelion... Well, Beauclair is a special, magical place where love works like a powerful 
spell on people... I'm sure you'll notice this. The Duchess got to know the troubadour. 
Maybe they did not even know it was happening – the poems, compliments, flowers, words, 
glances and sighs... To cut a story short, they both became too close.' 
'How close?' laughed Angouleme. 
'I was not an eyewitness,' the knight said stiffly. 'And it is not suitable to pass on gossip. 
Moreover, you should know at your age, my dear, that love has many names, ultimately men 
can be attracted to women, body to body.' 
Cahir snorted softly. Angouleme has nothing to add. 
'They met in secret for about two months,' continues Reynart de Bois-Fresnes. 'From 
Belleteyn in midsummer. Over time, however, they forgot prudence. Rumours spread and 
vicious talk of them did not leave them alone. Mister Dandelion did not stay and hurriedly 
left the principality. It soon became clear how wise that was. For barely had he left before 
Prince Rajmund returned from Cintra, and a servant told him everything. The Prince, when 
he had heard of the insult that had been made against him, as you can imagine, fell into a 
severe rage. He threw his bowl of soup on the table, slit the informers throat with a knife and 
roared words of little decency. Then he hit the Marshal in the face and broke his teeth and 
then in front of witnesses broke a wonderful mirror from Kovir into pieces. The Duchess was 
sent under arrest to her quarters and was threatened with torture to extract what had 
happened. After that he commanded that his soldiers pursue Mister Dandelion, and to kill him 
without mercy and cut his heart out of his chest. Inspired by some old ballads, he had 
thoughts to fry the heart and force Duchess Anarietta to eat the heart in front of the whole 
court. Ugh, disgusting! Thankfully, Mister Dandelion managed to disappear over the border 
in time.' 
'Thankfully. Then the prince died?' 
'He died. The incident, as I was told, brought his blood to the boil, it is said that he had 
apoplexy and became paralysed. He lay for nearly half a year like a log. But then he was fine. 
He stood on his feet again and walked. But with squinty eyes, like...' 
The Knight turned in his saddle, screwed up his eyes and grimaced like a monkey. 
'While Prince Rajmund,' he continued, 'had always been renowned as a womanizer, with 
the squint, he became even greater at fornicating, because every woman was thinking that he 
was winking in a sign of love for her. And quite a few females enjoyed the prince's attention. 
I am not saying that all the weaker sex in Toussaint are greedy with loose morals, but as the 
prince winked almost eternally, the majority of those women came out on top. But in the end 
trying to keep up with all this mischief, one night the apoplexy stuck him again. He breathed 
his last. In the bedroom.' 
'On top of a girl?' laughed Angouleme. 
 'Indeed,' the normal serious Knight, smiled behind his moustache. 'In truth he was 
beneath her. But there is no need to go into details.' 
'It stands to reason that you do not,' Cahir said seriously. 'Though I think there wasn't a 
lot of mourning for Prince Rajmund? During your story I got the impression...' 

'That the unfaithful wife will be more loved that the cheating husband,' interrupted the 
vampire in his usual way. 'Which is perhaps why she rules now?' 
'That is one reason why,' Reynart de Bois-Fresnes answered with a disarming sincerity. 
'But not only that. Prince Rajmund, to put it mildly, was dishonest, a villain, and forgive me, 
a motherfucker, that would cause the devil himself an ulcer in six months. And Toussaint 
suffered under his rule for seven years. But Duchess Anareitta is adored by the people.' 
'So we do not have to worry,' Geralt asked sourly, 'that the deceased Prince Rajmund left 
anyone who would honour him by putting a dagger into our friend, Dandelion?' 
'You do not have to worry,' the Knight looked at him understandingly. 'On my honour, 
nothing will happen to him. As I told you, Our Lady is devoted to the poet and Anarietta 
would make mincemeat out of anyone who tried to harm him.' 
 
The good knight returns, 
When the war is over, 
Not expecting his beloved, 
Has now been married, 
Hey, ho, ho, 
That's the knight's fate. 
 
Alarmed by the knights singing, a flock of screaming crows took flight from the trees 
lining the roadside. 
Soon they left the forest into a wide valley between the hills, on which the towers of a 
palace shone white against the blue sky. As far as the eye could see, the gentle hills were 
covered in neatly trimmed hedges and bushes. The ground beneath the bushes was lined with 
red and yellow leaves. 
'What is that?' Angouleme asked. 'Grapevines?' 
'Grapevines,' confirmed Reynart de Bois-Fresnes. 'The famous valley of Sansretour. 
The world's most excellent wine is made from the grapes that grow here.' 
'True,' said Regis, who as usual, knew everything. 'Due to the volcanic soil here and the 
local microclimate that provides the ideal amount of sunny days with annual precipitation. If 
we add to this tradition the knowledge and care from the workers of the vineyard, the 
resulting product is a superior quality brand.' 
'Well put,' the Knight smiled. 'Quality and brand. Oh, look, for example, on the slopes 
below the palace, in this region we give names to the wines and vineyards. This is called the 
Castel Ravello and its wines come from vineyards such as Erveluce, the Fiorano, the famous 
Pomino and Est Est. Surely you have heard of it. A barrel of Est Est wine is tenfold as much 
as you would pay for a barrel from the Cidaris vineyard of Alba. And there, oh, look, you can 
see other castles and vineyards, but the names will probably be too foreign to you – 
Vermentino, Toricella, Casteldaccia, Tufo, Sancerre, Nuragus, Coronata and finally Corvo 
Bianco, which the elves call, Gwyn Cerbin. I take it these names are foreign to you?' 
 'Foreign, ha!' said Angouleme. 'You especially need the knowledge so that a rogue 
innkeeper does not pour one of these wines and not ordinary plonk, otherwise more than once 
I would have had to leave my horse as a pledge, of what Est Est wine would cost. This stuff 
might be great for lords, but we the ordinary people, the cheaper the better. And I can tell you 
this for I've experienced both – puking is the same whether you've had Est Est wine or cheap 
wine.' 
 
*** 
 

'Don't judge us on our cheap wines, Angouleme,' Reynart said, sitting at a bench behind 
a table. 'We'll bring you a quality brand and a good year. We can afford to, we've earned it. 
We can treat ourselves to our heart's content.' 
'Of course,' Geralt said, waving to the innkeeper. 'Dandelion sometimes says that there 
are other motivations for making money, but can never recall what. I want to taste what is 
making those tempting smells from the kitchen. Anyway, I did not expect at this late hour, 
Pheasantry would have this many guests.' 
'But today is the feast of Yule,' said the innkeeper, who had heard his words. 'People are 
celebrating. Having fun. Having fortunes read. According to tradition...' 
'I know,' the witcher interrupted. 'And in the kitchen, what tradition are you preparing 
today?' 
'Smoked tongue and horseradish. Capon broth with meatballs. Roast meat, dumplings and 
sauerkraut...' 
'Bring it quickly, my good man. And for... What do we ask for, Reynart?' 
'With meat,' thought the Knight, 'We'll have a red Cote de Blessure. The year that the 
old Countess Caroberta kicked the bucket.' 
'A wonderful choice,' the innkeeper nodded. 'At your service, gentlemen.' 
A spring of mistletoe thrown over the shoulder of one of the girl at a neighbouring table 
fell into Geralt's lap. The celebrating company laughed and the girl blushed prettily. 
'None of that,' the Knight threw the spring back. 'This is not your chosen one. He is 
already busy, gracious lady. He is already captivated by certain green eyes...' 
'Shut up, Reynart!' 
The innkeeper brought the ordered food and drink, and then they ate and drank in silence, 
watching the surrounding festivities. 
'Yule,' Geralt said thoughtfully, placing his cup on the table. 'Midinvaerne. The winter 
solstice. I'm stuck here for two months. Two months lost.' 
'One month,' Reynart corrected him soberly. 'If you lose anything, then it is only one 
month. The snow will cover the mountain passes and you will not be able to leave Toussaint. 
You will have to stay here during Yule and probably until spring, because it will be in vain to 
waste tears on force majeure. In any case, do not go overboard with the sadness and grief. I 
do not believe that they are sorry for you.' 
'What do you know, Reynart? What do you know?' 
'Not much,' replied the Knight, pouring. 'Not much more than what I see. And I saw your 
first meeting, you and her. In Beauclair. Remember the festival of the vat? The white 
underwear?' 
Geralt did not answer. Remembering. 
'Our castle in Beauclair is magical, its charms act powerfully on people,' muttered 
Reynart, sipping wine and rolling it over his tongue. 'The view alone is able to charm. I 
remember how you gasped when you saw it, in October. Cahir show us what expression he 
used then.' 
 
*** 
 
'A spectacular castle,' Cahir said with admiration. 'On my soul, it is admirable and 
pleasing to the eye.' 
'A pretty place your Duchess lives,' said Regis. 'This has to be our stop.' 
'A fucking nice place,' Angouleme added. 
'Palace Beauclair,' Reynart Bois-de Fresnes said proudly. 'An Elvish building only 
slightly modified and redesigned. Apparently by Faramond himself.' 

'No doubt,' said the vampire. 'There is no doubt the Faramond style is evident at first 
glance. Just look at those towers.' 
The towers, slender, white obelisks, that Regis pointed to, rose high above the red roofs to 
the sky. At first sight they resembled candles, with wax cascading down to the masterfully 
decorated base. 
'At the foot of Beauclair,' the Knight Reynart explained, 'lies the city. The wall, of 
course, was added later, after all, elves do not build walls around a city. Spur your horses, 
gentlemen, we still have a long way to go. Beauclair looks close, but the mountains throw off 
perspective.' 
'Let's go.' 
On the way to the city they overtook carts and wagons, lots of carts and wagons – all full 
of grapes. They entered the noisy and grape scented streets of a city park after dark, full of 
poplar, yew and barberry. They passed roses, mostly multiflora varieties and centifolia. 
Finally they stood before the carved columns and portals of the palace, were stood soldiers 
and footmen in livery. 
Among those that greeted them was Dandelion, combed and dress like a prince. 
 
*** 
 
'Where is Milva?' 
'It's okay, don't worry. She is sitting in the chambers, which were prepared for you, and 
does not want to move from there.' 
'Why?' 
'We'll talk about that later. Now come, the Duchess is waiting.' 
'Right now?' 
'That was her wish.' 
The hall into which they entered was full of people as colourful as birds of paradise. 
Geralt did not have time to look around, because Dandelion pushed him towards a marble 
dais on which stood two women, significantly differing from the surrounding society. 
It was quiet, but it grew quieter. 
The first of the women had a sharp, slightly raised nose and penetrating blue eyes that 
seemed feverish. Her auburn hair was adjusted in a perfect and truly artistic style, tied with 
silk ribbons and submitted to the last detail – including flawless crescent curls on her 
forehead. The bodice of her dress was cut deep and interwoven with pale blue and iridescent 
purple stripes on a black background, with a dense and regular design of small embroidered 
gold chrysanthemums. Her neck was adorned with a mesh of extremely complex goldsmith's 
work – a necklace of emeralds, onyx and lapis lazuli, the lowermost edge was completed with 
a jade cross, located between her breasts, bound by the tight bodice. It seemed that the fragile 
shoulders of the woman would not generate sufficient support for her broad and deep 
cleavage, and that at any moment her breast might slip out. However, they remained in place, 
kept in position by the secret mysteries of dressmaking and the buffers of puffy sleeves. 
Her companion was more or less the same height and had lipstick on her lips the same 
colour. But that's where the similarity of the two women ended. The other wore her hair 
cropped short in a lace cap trimmed with a muslin veil reaching to the tip of her nose. The 
flower motif of the veil could not conceal her large lustrous eyes, highlighted with green 
shadow. The same floral veil covered a very modest neckline of a black dress with long 
sleeves. The dress was seemingly randomly decorated with gold stars embroidered with tiny 
cut aquamarines and mountain crystals. 
'Her ladyship, the Duchess Anna Henrietta. Kneel, Sir,' said someone, whispering behind 
Geralt. 

I wonder which one, thought Geralt, who with effort bent his sore knee in a ceremonial 
bow. I'll be damned if they both don't look royal. 
'Arise, Sir Geralt,' the lady with the auburn hair and slightly raised nose, dispelled his 
doubts. 'I welcome you to Castle Beauclair in the Principality of Toussaint. I am delighted to 
be able to host those who are carrying out such a noble mission. Moreover, you've also been 
a friend to our dear Viscount Julian.' 
At these words Dandelion bowed deeply. 
'The Viscount,' continued the Duchess, 'has revealed to me your names and the reason 
and purpose of your mission, and told me what brings you to Toussaint. His story touched my 
heart. I am going to give you a private audience, Sir Geralt. It will have to be delayed a small 
while, as I am saddled with state requirements. The harvest is complete and tradition requires 
our participation in the feast of the vat.' 
The woman in the veil at the Duchess's side leaned forward and whispered something 
quickly. Anna Henrietta looked at the witcher, smiled and licked her lips. 
'It is my desire,' she raised her voice, 'that during the festival alongside Viscount Julian, 
Geralt of Rivia will serve us.' 
A murmur swept through the group of courtiers and knights, like the rustling of wind 
through the pines. The Duchess Anarietta gave the witcher one last glance and left the room 
with her companion and retinue of pages. 
'Damn,' said the Chessboard Knight. 'That is a surprise. You have received a great 
honour, Sir Geralt.' 
'I'm not too clear what it was,' said Geralt. 'How should I serve Her Grace?' 
'Her Belovedness,' corrected a nobleman with the appearance of a confectioner. 'I'm 
sorry, sir, to correct you, but I have to meet obligations. We, in Toussaint, adhere to tradition 
and protocol. I am Sebastian Le Goff, chamberlain and marshal of the palace.' 
'Pleased to meet you.' 
'The official title of Lady Anna Henrietta,' said the chamberlain, who not only looked 
like a confectioner, but even smelled like icing, 'is "Your Enlightenedness" and unofficially 
"Lady Duchess" for outside of court. But you should always address her as "Your 
Belovedness". 
'Thank you, I'll remember that. And the other lady? How do I title her?' 
'Her official title is "venerable"' the chamberlain instructed him seriously. 'But it is 
possible to address her as "ma'am". She is a relative of the Duchess, called Fringilla Vigo. 
According to the will of Her Belovedness, it is Lady Fringilla that you will serve at the 
festival.' 
'And what is involved with this service?' 
'Nothing complicated. Let me tell you, long ago we used mechanical presses for grapes, 
but the tradition...' 
 
*** 
 
The courtyard resounded with the hum and trills of pipes, flutes and the fierce clatter of 
drums and tambourines. On stage, in the middle of the courtyard stood a huge vat, in which 
jugglers and acrobats jumped around doing flips and somersaults. The courtyard and the 
galleries were crowded with spectators – ladies, nobles, knights, burgesses, merchants and 
common people. 
Sebastian Le Goff lifted a staff entwined with vies and tapped it three times on the 
pavement. 
'Ho, ho!' he called. 'Noble ladies and gentlemen, knights, people!' 
'Ho, ho!' replied the crowd. 

'Ho, ho! This is an ancient custom! Let the vines thrive! Ho, ho! Let the sun ripen them!' 
'Ho, ho! Let them ripen!' 
'Ho, ho! Let them ferment! Let them take strength and flavour from the barrels! Let it 
change into wine! Let it flow into our cups and raise them to the honour of our majesty, the 
beautiful ladies, brave knights and industrious winemakers!' 
'Ho, ho! Cheers!' 
'Let them Beauties come forward!' 
From a damask tent on the opposite side of the courtyard stood two women – Duchess 
Anna Henrietta and her dark-haired companion. Both were shrouded in long scarlet cloaks. 
'Let the young come forward!' 
The "young" were instructed in advance what to do. Dandelion went to the Duchess and 
Geralt stepped out to meet the dark-haired companion, which he knew as Fringilla Vigo. 
Both women dropped their cloaks and the crowd rose in a thunderous ovation. Geralt 
swallowed. 
The women were wearing sleeveless white shirts made of thin spiderweb like fabric, 
which did not even reach to their thighs. And lacy panties. And nothing more. Not even 
jewellery. And they walked barefoot. 
Geralt offered Fringilla his arm, she willingly embraced him around the neck. She 
smelled of roses and amber. Her body was warm and soft. 
The women were brought to the vat, Geralt with Fringilla and the Duchess with 
Dandelion and helped to stand up in the grape juice. The crowd roared. 
'Ho, ho!' 
Anarietta and Fringilla stood facing each other and laid their hands on each other's 
shoulders to more easily maintain balance among the grapes, which rose to above their knees. 
Juice spat and sprayed. The women spun around inside the vat and laughed like kids. 
Fringilla shot the witcher a playful wink. 
'Ho, ho!' shouted the audience. 'Let then ferment!' 
Juice flowed and bubbled about the calves of the females. 
The chamberlain struck his staff on the pavement. Geralt and Dandelion approached and 
help the women get out of the vat. Geralt saw Anarietta nibble on the troubadour's ear when 
he lifted her in his arms. Her eyes glittered dangerously. He himself felt Fringilla's lips brush 
his cheek, but could not swear whether by accident or intentionally. The strong smell of wine, 
hit him in the head. Fringilla stood on the stage and wrapped herself in a scarlet cloak. The 
brunette squeezed his hand strongly. 
'These old traditions,' she said, 'can be exciting, right?' 
'Yes.' 
'Thank you, witcher.' 
'The pleasure is all mine.' 
'Not all of it, I assure you.' 
 
*** 
 
'Pour, Reynart,' 
The company at the next table performed a more festive divination – throwing a chain of 
peeled apple skins and guessing there future partners from the letter it resembled. Even 
though practically every throw produced the letter "S", they continued to throw. 
The knight poured. 
'Milva, it turns out,' said the witcher, lost in thought, 'is healthy, though she still wears a 
bandage around her ribs. But she is sitting in her room refusing to exit because she does not 
want to wear a bloody dress. It seemed that the conflict was going to break protocol, but the 

situation was calmed by the omniscient, Regis. Citing a hundred precedents forced the 
Chamberlain to bring her some male clothes. Angouleme was happy for a change to get rid of 
her pants and riding boots. After some soap, a comb and a dress she resembles a pretty girl. 
All of us seem to be in a better mood after a bath and clean clothes. Even me. I was in a fairly 
good mood when we went to the audience...' 
'Wait a minute,' interrupted Reynart and with a movement of his head indicated the 
across the taproom. 'We have some interest heading towards us. Ha, not one but two 
vineyards. Our Customer Malatesta is bringing his neighbour... and competitor. Wonder of 
wonders!' 
'Who is the second?' 
Pomerol vineyards. From there comes the Cote de Blessure, the wine that we just drank.' 
Malatesta, Vermentino's vineyard administrator, waved his arms and rushed over to them. 
The man he was leading had lush black hair and a black moustache, like an outlaw rather than 
an honourable citizen. 
'Allow me, gentlemen,' Malatesta said. 'Mister Alcides Fierabras, Pomerol vineyard 
administrator.' 
'Sit down, please.' 
'Just a minute. Mister Witcher about the monster from our cellars. By the fact that you are 
here, I assume the beast is slain. Am I correct?' 
'Quite dead.' 
'The agreed upon sum,' Malatesta assured him, 'will be paid to your account with G later 
today. Thank you very much, Mister Witcher. Very few large wineries can boast such a large 
cellar, deep and spacious, bearing to the north, neither too dry nor too wet – just perfect for 
wine. It was a shame that it could not be used. Did you see for yourself the part of the cellar 
when the monster managed to crawl through? The devil knows from where... Probably 
straight out of hell...' 
'The caves in volcanic tuffs often serve as havens for various monsters.' Reynart 
instructed importantly. He had accompanied the witcher for more than a month and was a 
good listener and learned things. 'Sure enough, where there is a tuff, you'll find a monster.' 
'Maybe the tuff,' Malatesta squinted at him. 'But people say it's because our basement 
connects with deep caverns that lead into the heart of the country. Such caves are numerous 
in this country...' 
'You don't have to look far,' said the bearded Pomerol. 'Also under our cellars are 
corridors that stretch for miles and nobody knows where they end. Those who went to 
explore never returned. And there have been seen terrible monsters. So I would ask...' 
'I can guess,' said the witcher, 'what you would ask. I accept. I will examine your cellars. 
My fee is determined in accordance with this and what I come across.' 
'You will not regret it,' said the bearded man. 'Uh, uh, uh... One more thing...' 
'Speak. I'm listening.' 
 'The succubus that haunts the nights and torments men... The one that the enlightened 
Duchess has ordered you to kill... I think there is no requirement to kill her. She bothers no 
one, to tell the truth... Oh, sometimes we will visit when drunk...to sometimes just try a 
little...' 
'But only the adults,' Malatesta added quickly. 
'I had it on the tip of my tongue, neighbour. As I said, the succubus harms no one. And 
lately even appears to be frightened of you Mister Witcher. So why pursue her? After all, you 
do not need the cash. But if you are offended...' 
'You could help my account with Gianfanelli,' Geralt said with a straight face. 'A witcher 
pension fund.' 
'So be it.' 

'The succubus's blond head will not fall.' 
'And farewell,' both of the vineyard administrators stood up. 'We will leave you in peace 
and not disturb you. This is a day of festival. A tradition. And here in Toussaint a tradition 
is...' 
'I know,' said Geralt. 'Holy." 
 
*** 
 
The company at the next table should loudly with joy at a new divination, which was 
made by using a ball of pie dough and the bones of a fish. Drinking at the same time, the 
innkeeper and the wenches bustled about running with jugs. 
'The famous succubus,' Reynart said scoping more cabbage into his dish, 'was one of the 
first of the witcher contracts you accepted when you came to Toussaint. After that everything 
move so fast and you couldn't get rid of customers. The funny thing is I do not remember 
which of the wineries gave you your first assignment...' 
'You were not there. I happened the second day after the audience with the Duchess. The 
audience where you were not needed.' 
'It's no wonder. It was a private audience.' 
'Private,' spluttered Geralt. 'It was attended by about twenty people. And that is not 
counting the footmen who were motionless as statues, pages, young children and a boring 
clown. Among those that I counted, were Le Goff, the chamberlain who would rather be a 
confectioner. There were several nobles bending under the weight of gold chains. There were 
a few cronies in black, councillors, maybe judges. There was baron with a bull's head coat of 
arms from Caed Myrkvid. And Fringilla, of course, who is obviously close to your duchess. 
And there was our bunch, including Milva in male attire. Oh, we were poorly expressed. It 
was not our whole group, we were missing Dandelion. Dandelion or rather Viscount Julian 
was lounging in a chair beside Duchess Anarietta and strutted like a peacock. A royal 
favourite. Only Anarietta, Fringilla and Dandelion sat. No one else was allowed to sit. Even 
so, I was glad we did not have to kneel. The Duchess listened to me very intently, but 
fortunately she jumped only a few times during my talk. When I finally briefly recounted my 
conversation with the flaminica, she anxiously wrung her hands. The gesture was as sincere 
as it was exaggerated. It probably sounds like an absurd contradiction in terms, but trust me, 
Reynart, it was precisely so.' 
 
*** 
 
'Oh, oh, oh,' sighed the Duchess Anna Henrietta, wringing her hands. 'Your story 
distresses me, Mister Geralt. It seizes my heart with sadness.' 
She sniffled her nose and reached out her hand, Dandelion at once placed a cambric 
handkerchief embroidered with a monogram into it. The Duchess touched the handkerchief 
lightly to her cheeks, so as not to remove her makeup. 
'Oh, oh,' she repeated. 'So the druids know nothing of Ciri? Were they not able to offer 
help? Were all your efforts in vain as the outcome of your journey?' 
'Surely not in vain,' he answered. 'I recognise that I did not get any concrete information 
from the druids or any clues, albeit only the most vague, to explain why Ciri had become the 
object of such fierce persecution. The druids, however, could not or would not help. In that 
case, I really did not learn anything new, but...' 
He paused for a moment. Not to be dramatic, but just to wonder if he could speak frankly 
in from of the whole gathering. 

'I know Ciri lives,' he said dryly. 'Probably was injured. And is still in danger. But she 
lives.' 
Anna Henrietta sighed again and took the handkerchief from Dandelion again. 
'I promise you our help and support,' she said. 'Stay in Toussaint as long as you wish. 
You should know that I used to visit Cintra, I knew and cultivated a friendship with Pavetta 
and knew and loved little Ciri. I am with you wholeheartedly, Mister Geralt. If necessary, you 
will have the assistance of our scholars and sorcerers. The doors of our library and bookstores 
are open to you. I believe that we can find some clue, some sign or indication to point you on 
the right track. Do not act hastily. You need not hasten. You can stay here as a welcome guest 
as long as necessary.' 
'I thank you for your kindness and grace,' Geralt bowed. 'However, we must continue on 
the road. Ciri is still in danger. And we are also in danger. When we stop for too long in one 
place, the danger not only grows, but begins to threaten the people around us. I will not allow 
this.' 
The Duchess was silent for a while, stroking Dandelion's forearm with a rhythmic 
movement, like a cat. 
'Your words are noble and honest. But you do not have to worry here. The villains that 
stalked you were crushed by my knighthood, so that none escape, so I have been briefed by 
Viscount Julian. And one who dares cross your path better be careful. You are under my 
protection.' 
'I appreciate that,' Geralt swept another bow, and cursed his sore knee in spirit, and not 
just his knee. 'However, I must not conceal what Viscount Dandelion has forgotten to tell 
you. The rogues who chased me to Belhaven and the one that the brave knights beat in Caed 
Myrkvid, were indeed rogues from the guild of illustrious rogues, but also wore the colour of 
Nilfgaard.' 
'And what of it?' 
'Well, this was the tip of the force of Nilfgaardians that conquered Aedirn in twenty days, 
and they could do the same to you Duchy in twenty minutes.' 
'It is a war,' he insisted. 'What happened in the woods of Caed Myrkvid and Belhaven 
maybe regarded as rebellion and disruption to the rear of the imperial troops. Something like 
that usually causes repression. In a state of war...' 
'The war,' interrupted the Duchess, lifting her nose in the air, 'has undoubtedly been 
revoked. I wrote of this matter to my cousin Emhyr var Emreis. In my letter, I asked him 
firmly to stop the senseless bloodshed. The war has ended and there has definitely been a 
peace agreement.' 
'Not so,' Geralt said calmly. 'Across the Yaruga roam sword and fire, blood is being 
spilled. There is no indication that the war was to end. Rather the opposite.' 
He immediately regretted what he said. 
'How is this possible?' the Duchess's nose lifted even higher, her voice became harsh. 
'Did I hear right? The war continues? Why were we not told about this? Minister Tremblay?' 
'Excellency, I...' one if the nobles in gold chains fell to his knees. 'I did not want to 
worry... Upset... Highness...' 
'Guards,' she screamed. 'To the tower with him! You're fallen out of favour Mister 
Tremblay! In disgrace! Lord Chamberlain! Mister Secretary!' 
'At your orders, Your grace...' 
'Have our foreign minister immediately send a note to our cousin, the Emperor of 
Nilfgaard. We demand that he immediately, immediately cease fighting and sign for peace. 
For war and discord are bad things! Discord ruins strength and harmony!' 
'Your truth has clarity' said the Chamberlain. So far he smelled like powdered sugar, now 
his face took on its colour. 

'What are you still doing here, gentlemen? I have issued an order. No go, act!' 
Geralt looked around discreetly. The noble and officials maintained their stone faces, 
similar incidents like this were nothing new at court. He decided from now on he was just 
going to agree with the Duchess. 
Anarietta took the handkerchief and touch the tip of her nose with it and smiled at Geralt. 
'As you can see,' she said. 'Your fears were in vain. You have nothing to fear and can 
stay here as long as you want.' 
'Yes, Your Excellency.' 
In the silence you could clearly hear the worms chewing wood in the antique furniture. 
And the curse of one of the groom in the far courtyard dealing with a horse. 
'We would also like to ask you something, Mister Geralt,' Anarietta interrupted the 
silence. 'Since you are a witcher.' 
'At your service, Your Excellency.' 
'It is a plea from the many of the virtuous ladies of Toussaint. A nightmare is troubling 
their homes. A spirit, a demon in female form, a succubus, so shameless that we dare not 
describe her, tortures faithful and virtuous spouses. She enters the bedrooms at night and 
makes all kinds of knavery and abominable perversion that our modesty forbids us to speak 
of. You as an expert, certainly know what it is.' 
'Yes, Your Excellency.' 
'The women on Toussaint ask that you put an end to this indecency. And I assure you our 
infinite gratitude.' 
'Thank you for your confidence, Your Excellency.' 
 
*** 
 
Angouleme found the witcher and the vampire in the castle park; both were enjoying a 
walk and a quiet conversation. 
'You will not believe,' she said. 'You will not believe what I have to tell you. But it is the 
pure truth...' 
'Speak.' 
'Reynart de Bois-Fresnes, the Checkerboard knight, in addition to other knights, are in 
line at the county treasurer's chamber. And you know what for? To collect his pay for this 
month! The line, is at least half an archery field long and there are so many tabards, the eyes 
get tired. When I asked Reynart about it he said that a knight-errant shouldn't starve.' 
'What is so strange in all this?' 
'Are you kidding! A man becomes a knight for a noble calling! Not for a monthly salary!' 
'One does not exclude the other,' Regis said seriously. 'Trust me, Angouleme.' 
'Trust him, Angouleme,' Geralt said drily. 'Stop running around the castle in search of 
sensation, go keep Milva company. She is in a terrible mood and should not be left alone.' 
'Right. Auntie has her period and because of it is more angry than a wasp. I think...' 
'Angouleme!' 
'I'm going, I'm going.' 
Regis and Geralt stopped before a bed of slightly wilted Centifolias. Yet they were unable 
to continue their conversation. From behind a greenhouse emerged a man dressed in an 
elegant coat of sienna. 
'Good morning,' he bowed and wiped his knee with his biretta. 'Can I ask which of you 
gentlemen, praise be, is the witcher named Geralt, famous in his trade?' 
'I am' 
'My name is Jean Catillon, I am the steward of the Castel Toricella vineyards. The thing 
is that we could use a witcher in the cellars. I wanted to inquire if you were willing to...' 

'What is it?' 
'Well,' began Catillon, 'because of this damn war, merchants rarely come, so inventories 
increase, and there are no new places in the cellars for the new barrels. We thought that the 
various caves and tunnels below the castle which are said to stretch across our country could 
be expanded. We found a suitable cave – large, vaulted, neither too wet or dry, it would have 
been good for the wine...' 
'So what?' the witcher could not stand it. 
'It appears that there is a monster prowling in the cave. It burned two people, reducing 
one to bones and the other one was left blind, sir, the monster spits or vomits some kind of 
caustic lye or something...' 
'A solpuga,' said Geralt. 'Also called a venenosera.' 
'Here,' smiled Regis. 'You can see for yourself, Sir Catillon that you are dealing with a 
professional. A professional, it seems who has fallen from heaven. And have you asked for 
help from the famous local knights? The Duchess has a whole regiment of them and this is 
precisely their kind of mission, their reason for being.' 
'That is not their reason,' Steward Catillon shook his head. 'Their reason is to protect the 
highways, routes and passes, because if the merchants don't reach here, we would soon be 
broke. In addition, our knights are brave and warlike – but only on horseback. They wouldn't 
go underground for anything. And plus they are expensive...' 
He stopped and was silent. He had the look of a man who wanted to spit but couldn't. 
And a look of regret. 
'They are expensive,' Geralt finished for him, but not particularly scathing. 'Take note, 
my good man that I am even more expensive. It's a competitive market. But if we have a 
contract, I'll dismount from my horse and go underground. Think about it, but do not think 
about it too long, because I will not be in Toussaint long.' 
'You surprise me,' Regis said, as soon as the steward had walked away. 'Has the witcher 
in you suddenly been revived? Do you accept the contract? Are you going to hunt the 
monster?' 
'I too am surprised,' Geralt admitted frankly. 'I reacted unconsciously, impulsively. 
Somehow I felt pulled to it. But a bid can be rejected as too low. Let's get back to our 
conversation.' 
'Wait a minute,' Regis said looking over his shoulder. 'Something tells me that you're 
about to have more business.' 
Geralt cursed under his breath. On a path lined with cypress, two knights were walking 
towards them. He instantly recognised the first one; the enormous bull's head on a field of 
white snow could not be confused with any other shield. The second knight, tall, grey, with 
nobly angular features, like they were carved from granite, had a cross with golden lilies on a 
blue background. Stopping at the prescribed distance of two steps, the knights bowed. Geralt 
and Regis bowed back; the four of them remained in orderly silence by the tradition of 
chivalry for the count of ten heartbeats. 
'Allow me, gentlemen,' said the man with the bull's head shield, 'to introduce, Baron 
Palmerin de Launfal. And I, as you can remember am called...' 
'Baron de Peyrac-Peyran. As if it was possible to forget.' 
'We have a case for the witcher,' said Baron de Peyrac-Peyran. 'Relative, so to speak, to 
his professional work.' 
'Speak.' 
'In private.' 
'I have no secrets from Mister Regis.' 

'But the noble lords have them,' the vampire smiled. 'Therefore, if I may, I will take a 
look at that beautiful pavilion, which is probably a secluded toilet. Lord de Peyrac-Peyran... 
Lord de Launfal...' 
Bows were exchanged. 
'I'm listening,' Geralt broke the silence without thinking for a moment about waiting ten 
heartbeats. 
'It's,' Peyrac-Peyran lowered his voice and looked around fearfully, 'the succubus... The 
spirit that haunts the night. The Duchess and ladies have asked you to destroy. May I ask how 
much you have been promised to kill the monster?' 
'I'm sorry, gentlemen, but it is a professional secret.' 
'We understand, we understand,' said the knight with the cross of lilies. 'It is clear that 
we are dealing with an honourable man. Verily, I fear that such a man will find insult with 
our proposal, but I must give it. Renounce this contract, Sir Witcher. Please leave the 
succubus alone. We will not say anything to the Duchess and the ladies. And on my honour, 
we men of Toussaint, will exceed the amount of the ladies. You would be amazed by our 
generosity.' 
'Your proposal,' said the witcher in a cold voice, 'is in fact not too far from an insult.' 
'Mister Geralt,' Palmerin de Launfal's face was hard and serious. 'I'll tell you what we 
dare to propose. Ergo, there is a rumour about you. Saying that you only kill those monsters 
that are a threat. A real threat. Not from imagination, or from ignorance or prejudice. Let me 
tell you that the succubus does not threaten or harm anyone. Oh, she visits sleeping men... 
from time to time... And mortifies a little...' 
'But only to adults,' Peyrac-Peyran quickly added. 
'The ladies of Toussaint,' Geralt said looking around, 'would not be very happy if they 
knew of this conversation. Nor would the Duchess.' 
'We fully agree with you,' murmured Palmerin de Launfal. 'We recommend the utmost 
discretion. There is no need to irritate the bigoted guardian of decency.' 
'Open an account for me with one of the local dwarven banks,' Geralt said slowly and 
quietly. 'And amaze me with your generosity. But be advised that it is not easy to amaze me.' 
'We are still going to try,' Peyrac-Peyran said confidently. 
They exchanged farewells. 
He returned to Regis, who of course had heard everything with his vampire hearing. 
'Now,' he said without smiling,' you can argue that it was an involuntary reflex and 
inexplicable impulse. But how do you explain that to an open bank account?' 
Geralt looked somewhere high above the tops of the cypress trees. 
'Who knows,' he said. 'Maybe we'll spend a few days here. Given Milva's broken ribs, it 
may even be more than a few days. Maybe a couple of weeks? It would not hurt if during this 
time we gained some financial independence.' 
 
*** 
'So that's were there bank account with Gianfanelli came from,' Reynart de Bois-Fresnes 
shook his head. 'Well, if the Duchess finds out, it will mean new changes in rank, there 
would be a new distribution of patents. Ha, maybe I'd even get promoted? On my honour, it's 
a shame you do not have the qualities of a snitch. Tell me now of the famous banquet that 
caused you so much joy. I longed to take part in it, to eat and drink! But they sent me to the 
border, to a watchtower, in the cold and grey mountains. What despair, the fate of a knight..!' 
'The large and highly anticipated banquet,' Geralt said, 'was prepared with great care and 
diligence. We mainly had to find Milva, who had holed up in the stables and convince her 
that her attendance at the banquet was essential and depended upon the fate of Ciri and nearly 

the whole world. We almost forcibly compelled her to wear women's clothes. Then we had to 
get Angouleme to promise to behave as a well-behaved young lady, and to especially avoid 
words like "fuck" and "ass". And when we finally got everything ready and to ensure our 
success we downed a cup of wine, your confectioner Le Goff appeared. Smelling like frosting 
and puffing like a pig's bladder.' 
 
*** 
 
'By virtue of my office,' Le Goff said through his nose. 'I want to assure you that at the 
festive board, Her Highness has few places of honour and importance, therefor no one can 
feel prejudice to the place allocated to him. But because here, in Toussaint, we pay special 
attention to traditions and customs...' 
'Get to the point, sir.' 
'The banquet is tomorrow. I organise all guests according to their origin and status.' 
'Sure,' the Witcher said seriously. 'The most important of us is Dandelion. Both in origin 
and status.' 
'Viscount Julian,' the Chamberlain said, wrinkling his nose, 'is an extraordinary guest of 
honour. As such, he will sit at the right hand of Her Serene Highness.' 
'Sure,' repeated the Witcher, with all seriousness. 'And he has failed to clarify what our 
ranks, titles and honours are?' 
'He revealed,' the Chamberlain coughed, 'but only that the noble gentlemen and maidens 
are travelling incognito, and therefore cannot reveal their names, ranks and titles.' 
'That is correct. What is the problem?' 
'I have to know! You are guest and companions of the Viscount, so you will be sitting 
near the head of the table... Among the Barons. But it is still possible that you gentlemen and 
ladies maybe of a higher rank, which would entitle you to sit closer to the Duchess...' 
'He,' said the witcher, pointing to the vampire without hesitation, who was not far away 
admiring a tapestry which took up most of the wall, 'is an Earl. But not a word about it. It is a 
secret.' 
'I understand,' gasped the fat man with excitement. 'In those circumstances... I will seat 
him next to Countess Notturna, the noble and gracious aunt of the Duchess.' 
'You will not regret it, neither you nor the aunt,' Geralt assured him with a straight face. 
'The earl has no equal in the ways of art and conversation.' 
'I am pleased to hear it. For your part, Lord of Rivia, I will sit you next to the venerable 
Lady Fringilla. As is the tradition. You carried her to the vat, you are her... hmmm... knight, 
as it...' 
'I understand.' 
'Excellent. Ah, Earl...' 
'What?' the vampire said surprised who had just moved away from the tapestry, 
representing the battle with a Cyclops. 
'Nothing, nothing,' Geralt smiled. 'We were just talking.' 
'Aha,' Regis nodded. 'I do not know if you gentlemen have noticed... But the Cyclops in 
the tapestry, the one with the club... Look at the toes on his feet. I'm afraid to say that he has 
two left feet.' 
'Indeed,' Chamberlain Le Goff confirmed without a trace of amazement. 'There are more 
of these tapestries in Beauclair. The weaver who wove it was a true master. But he drank a 
lot. But he was an artist.' 
 
*** 
 

'It's time,' said the witcher, avoiding the eyes of the wine tipsy girls peering at him from 
the other table, who were amusing themselves with divination. 'Let's go, Reynart. Pay up, get 
the horses and lets go to Beauclair.' 
'I know why you are in such a hurry,' the knight showed his teeth. 'Don't worry, green 
eyes will be waiting. It is hardly midnight. Tell me about the banquet.' 
'I'll tell you and we'll go.' 
'Let's go.' 
 
*** 
 
The sight of the huge horseshoe shaped banquet table clearly reminded them that autumn 
was finished and winter was approaching. Among the food bowls and trays, were platters of 
venison and all possible types of game. There were whole quarters of wild boar, deer, hams 
and pink slices of smoked meat and pies. All decorated with seasoned mushrooms, 
cranberries and rowanberries. There were autumn birds – grouse, pheasant, quail, served with 
decorative wings and tails, roasted in hazel and mistle. They also served fish – trout and pike, 
fished from the mountain streams. 
Even in autumn they did not lack the festive greens. It included a salad of lettuce, which 
must have been harvested while still under the snow. Flowers had been substituted with 
mistletoe. 
In the middle of the horseshoe table at the place of honour, where the Duchess Anarietta 
and her guest would sit, was a large silver tray filled with decorations. Among the flowers, 
lemon slices, artichoke hearts and truffles, stood an enormous sturgeon on whose back stood 
a heron. In its raised beak it held a golden ring. 
'I swear by the heron!' Peyrac-Peyran the well-known Baron with the bull's head coat of 
arms cried, standing up and raising his cup. 'By the heron I swear to defend the honour of 
knighthood, and to never leave the field to anyone!' 
The vow was rewarded with tumultuous applause. They began to eat. 
'I swear by the heron,' shouted another knight with a twisted aggressive moustache like a 
broom. ' I swear to defend to the last drop of my blood the borders of Her Excellency Anna 
Henrietta! To prove my loyalty, I swear to paint on my shield a heron and for a year to fight 
incognito and shall be called the Knight of the White Heron! Health to Our Lady the 
Duchess!' 
'Health! Happiness! Cheers! Long live the Duchess!' 
Anarietta thanked them with a slight nod of her diamond tiara decorated head. She was 
wearing so many diamonds, that if she was to walk past a window she would scratch the 
glass. Dandelion sat beside her and smiled stupidly. A little further on, between to matrons, 
sat Emiel Regis. He was dressed in a black velvet jacket which made him look like a 
vampire. He served the matrons with conversation and they listened fascinated. 
Geralt took a platter covered in a perch and parsley and offered it to Fringilla Vigo who 
was sitting to his left. She wore a gown of blue satin and a gorgeous amethyst necklace. She 
looked at him from under her long eyelashes, lifted her cup and smiled mysteriously. 
'Your health, Geralt. I'm glad that we sat next to each other.' 
'Do not praise the day before sunset,' he said returning her smile, because he was in a 
good mood. 'The banquet has barely begun.' 
'On the contrary. It has lasted long enough, you haven't given me a compliment. How 
long must I wait?' 
'Your beauty so dazzles me that I lack the words.' 

'Slow down, slow down,' she laughed, and he swore that it was honest. 'I fear to think 
how far we would go at this rate before the end of the banquet. Start from... Well, say I have 
an elegant dress and blue suits me.' 
'The colour blue suits you. But I have to admit that I liked you more in white.' 
He recognised a challenge in her emerald eyes. He feared to accept it. His good humour 
did not reach that far. 
Cahir and Milva sat on the opposite side of the table. The young man was sitting between 
two noble young ladies, probably baronesses that kept talking to him. Meanwhile, the archer 
kept company with an older gentleman, dark and silent, his stone face was scarred from 
smallpox. 
A little further on sat Angouleme, leading yarns and the uproar of young knights. 
'What is this?' she squeaked, waving around a silver knife. 'A blunt knife? Are they 
afraid that we will start a fight at the banquet?' 
'These knives,' explained Fringilla, 'have been used in Beauclair since the days of 
Princess Caroline Roberta, Anna Henrietta's grandmother. Karoberta hated when the guests 
at the table picked their teeth with knives and blades with rounded tips were introduce so 
there was no way of picking.' 
'No way,' agreed Angouleme, smiling impishly. 'Fortunately, they gave me a fork!' 
 She pretended to put the fork in her mouth, but a menacing glare from Geralt stopped 
her. The knight who sat to his right laughed with a vibrant falsetto. 
Geralt took a pot of duck in aspic and served it to Fringilla. He saw two young 
Baronesses religiously looking at Cahir, and how he honestly tried to divide among them 
equally his attention. He saw the young knights bustle around Angouleme, getting her food 
and laughing at her silly jokes. 
He saw Milva crumbling bread and staring at the tablecloth. 
Fringilla seemed to read his thoughts. 
'It's too bad,' she whispered, leaning towards him, 'about your tight-lipped friend. Well, 
such things happen when laying out the table. Chivalry is not Baron de Trastamara strong 
point.' 
'Maybe it's better,' Geralt said quietly, 'a slobbery and willing courtier would have been 
worse. I know Milva.' 
'Are you sure?' she looked at him quickly. 'Could it be you measure her with your own 
staff? Which, frankly. Is pretty grim.' 
He did not answer, instead he poured wine. And he recognised it was time to clarify a 
certain issue.' 
'You're a sorceress, right?' 
'I am,' she said, deftly hiding her total surprise. 'How did you know?' 
'I can feel an aura,' he did not enter into details. 'I have had experience.' 
'To be clear,' she said. 'I did not intend to deceive anyone. On the other hand, I am under 
no obligation to show off my profession or to impose a pointy hat and black cloak. Why 
should they have to scare children with me? I have the right to be incognito.' 
'I do not deny it.' 
'I am in Beauclair because here is the largest and richest library in the known world. 
Besides the university, that is. But universities guard access to their shelves and here I am a 
relative and friend to Anarietta and can do anything I want.' 
'An enviable position.' 
'During the audience the duchess suggested that in the library or archive you may find 
some useful information. Do not be fooled by her exaltation, she's like that. But you may find 
something in the local books. You just have to know where to look.' 
'As simple as that.' 

'Your enthusiasm is really contagious and encourages me to continue the conversation,' 
her green eyes flashed. 'I guess the reason is because you do not trust me, correct?' 
'Would you like more hazel grouse?' 
'I swear by the heron!' A young knight from the end of the horseshoe got up and tied a 
sash around one eye that was held out by a neighbour at the table. 'I vow to not take off this 
sash until all the bandits in the passage of Cervantes are killed!' 
The Duchess nodded at him with her sparkling tiara. 
Geralt hoped Fringilla would not pursue the subject. He was wrong. 
'You do not believe or trust me,' she said. 'You have caused me a painful double blow. 
Not only do you doubt the sincerity that I want to help, but you do not believe that I can. Oh, 
Geralt! You have hurt my pride and lofty ambition.' 
'Listen...' 
 'No!' She raised her knife and fork as if threatened them. 'Do not explain yourself. I 
cannot stand men who are justified.' 
'What kind of man can you stand?' 
Her eyes narrowed, but she still held the cutlery like knives ready to strike. 
'The list is long,' she said slowly, 'and I do not want to bore you with the details. I will 
mention only those men occupied by distinguished positions who are willing to follow a 
loved one to the end of the world and do not succumb to fear and despise danger. And do not 
give up even when it seems there is no chance.' 
'What about other positions on the list?' he could not contain himself. 'Are their men who 
you do like? Are they also crazy?' 
'What is real masculinity,' she mockingly shook her head, 'but the right mixture of crazy 
and style?' 
'Ladies and gentlemen, barons and knights!' Cried the Chamberlain Le Goff as he rose 
and stood with both hands on a gigantic glass. 'Under these circumstances I would make a 
toast to the health of our most serene ladyship, the Duchess Anna Henrietta!' 
'Health and happiness!' 
'Hurray!' 
'Long live the Duchess!' 
'And now ladies and gentlemen,' the Chamberlain set down the glass and gestured 
towards the servants, 'Now... Magna beast!' 
On a tray resting on the shoulders of four strapping servants was a gargantuan roast being 
brought into the hall. 
'Magna beast!' The rest of the guest cried in chorus. 'Hurray! Magna beast!' 
'And what fucking beast is that?' Angouleme expressed her concern aloud. 'I won't eat it 
until I find out what it is.' 
'It's a deer,' Geralt said. 'A roast deer.' 
'And not just any deer,' Milva spoke, clearing her throat. 'The deer weighs about seven 
hundredweight.' 
'Close. It is seven hundredweight and forty pounds,' said the baron sitting next to her 
hoarsely. They were the first words that he had spoken since the beginning of the banquet. 
Maybe it would have been the beginning of a conversation, but the archer blushed, fixed 
her eyes on the tablecloth and resumed crushing her bread. 
But Geralt took to heart, Fringilla's words. 
'Were you perhaps, Lord Baron,' he asked, 'the happy hunter, who took down this beast?' 
'No,' he replied. 'My nephew, an excellent marksman. But these are men's interests, so to 
speak... I'm sorry, I did not mean to bore the ladies present...' 
'From what bow?' Milva asked, still staring at the tablecloth. 'I'm sure from at least a 
seventy?' 

'The double bent zefar,' the Baron said slowly, visibly surprised. 'Laminate, Layers of 
yew, acacia, ash and bonded tendons. Seventy-five pounds of force.' 
'And tension?' 
'Twenty-nice inches,' the Baron spoke more slowly, he seemed to almost spit out the 
words. 
'A nice piece,' Milva said happily. 'It can shot a deer from perhaps a hundred paces. If 
the shooter is really good.' 
'I,' growled the Baron somewhat indignantly, 'at a quarter of a hundred paces, hit a 
pheasant.' 
'At a quarter of a hundred paces,' Milva lifted her head, 'I hit a squirrel.' 
The Baron, clearly flustered, quickly started on his food and drink. 
'A good bow is half the success,' he stammered. 'But equally important, so to speak, are 
quality arrows. To me the best...' 
'To the health of Her Excellency Anna Henrietta! To the health of Viscount Julian de 
Lettenhove!' 
'Cheers!' 
'...And she kicked him in the ass,' Angouleme finished another silly joke. The young 
knights rolled with laughter. 
The Baronesses whose names were Queline and Nique, listened to Cahir with open 
mouths, wide eyes and burning cheeks. At the head of the banquet table could be hear Regis 
and the higher aristocracy. For Geralt – even with his witcher hearing – could only make out 
a few buzz words here and there, but they seemed to be talking about ghosts, strigas, succubi 
and vampires. Regis gesticulated with a silver fork and argued the best remedy for vampires 
are silver, whose lightest touch is absolutely deadly to a vampire. What about garlic? Asked 
one of the ladies. Garlic is also effective; Regis went on, but socially awkward, because of 
the awful smell. 
In the gallery and orchestra played softly, fiddles and flutes and jugglers and fire-eaters 
boasted their arts. Jesters tried to entertain the company, but Angouleme raked over the top of 
them. Then came a bear – which to everyone's amusement did a pile of the floor. Angouleme 
became sad – she could not compete with something like that. 
The Duchess suddenly fell into a rage, with some reckless word one of the barons fell out 
of favour and went under escort to the tower. No one but the victim showed any sorrow. 
'Don't leave here so quickly,' Fringilla Vigo said suddenly, sipping from a cup. 'Even if 
you prefer to run away, none of this will.' 
'Please, do not read my thoughts.' 
'Sorry. They were so strong that I read them involuntarily.' 
'I don't know how many times I have heard that.' 
'I myself don't know how many times I know. Please, eat the artichokes, they are health 
and are good for the heart. The heart is an important organ in the male, the second when it 
comes to validity.' 
'I thought the most important were rank and madness.' 
'Qualities of the mind should go hand in hand with qualities of the body. This gives 
perfection.' 
'Nobody is perfect.' 
'This is not an argument. You have to try them. You know what. I will have that hazel 
grouse.' 
He cut the bird on her plate so fast and suddenly that the witch trembled. 
'Do not leave here so fast,' she said again. 'First, because you do not have too. And you 
are not in danger...' 

'Of course not,' he burst out. 'Nilfgaard will be frightened of a protest note from the 
Duchess. And if they did risk coming here, they'd be expelled by knights with sashes binding 
their eyes and vows made to herons.' 
'Nothing threatens you here,' she said, ignoring his sarcasm. 'Toussaint is considered the 
land of fairy tales, silly, clueless and thanks to it sustained economic focus in a state of 
constant drinking and recklessness. As such, it is not taken seriously by anyone, but is 
permitted to enjoy certain privileges. In the end we are the most prominent producer of wine 
and as we know, life without wine would be very unstable. In Toussaint there are no spies, 
agents or secret service. Toussaint doesn't need an army, just wandering knights wearing 
blindfolds because Toussaint is never attacked. By the look of you, I guess I have not 
convinced you.' 
'Not at all.' 
'A pity,' Fringilla squinted. 'I hate half-measures or half-promises. Neither of these 
things should be done by half. So I'll tell you – Fulko Artevelde, the prefect of Riebrune, 
thinks you are dead, some fugitives told him that the druids burned you alive. Fulko is doing 
his best to cover up the matter. If the case came to light, it could trigger an investigation that 
could cost Fulko his career at best. And when he sees you alive it will be too late – what he 
said in the reports will be binding.' 
'You know a lot.' 
'I do not deny it. So the argument about the persecution from the Nilfgaardians 
disappears. And now nothing forces your rapid departure.' 
'Interesting.' 
'But true. From Toussaint you can leave by four passes that lead to four different parts of 
the world. The Druids did not tell you anything and refused to cooperate. The mountain elf 
has disappeared...' 
'You really do know a lot.' 
'You already said that.' 
'And you want to help.' 
'And you refuse my help. You do not believe in the sincerity of my intentions. You don't 
trust me.' 
'Listen, I...' 
'Do not explain yourself. Eat some more artichokes.' 
Again someone made a vow to the heron. Cahir spoke to the baronesses giving them 
compliments. Angouleme, tipsy, could be heard throughout the whole room. The pockmarked 
and flushed baron, mesmerized by discussions about archery and hunting, even started flirting 
with Milva. 
'Please, my lady, try the wild boar ham. So to speak... They are from my manor forest, 
where a whole herd of them reside.' 
'Oh.' 
'There are among them some outstanding boars to hunt... Maybe sometime... you could 
come and we can, so to speak, go hunting together...' 
'But we will not be staying here long,' Milva looked pleadingly at Geralt. 'More 
important tasks than hunting lie ahead.' 
But when she saw how disappointed the Baron looked, she hastily added, 'Under other 
circumstances, I would be happy to go hunting boars.' 
The Baron immediately cheered up. 
'If not for hunting,' he said elated, 'at least for a visit. I would honestly like to invite you 
all to my manor. I can show you, so to speak, my collection of hunting trophies, bows and 
sword...' 

Milva looked down at the tablecloth. The Baron grabbed a tray of fowl and served her 
then filled her cup. 
'Excuse me, graceful maiden,' he said. "I'm not, so to speak, an entertaining companion. 
I do not control courtly manners and smooth words are foreign to me...' 
'I,' Milva shyly confessed, 'I was raised in the woods. I can appreciate peace and 
silence.' 
Fringilla found Geralt's hand under the table and held it tightly. Geralt looked into her 
eyes. He could not guess what was hidden in them. 
'I trust you,' he said. 'I believe in the sincerity of your purpose.' 
'You do not lie?' 
'I vow by the heron.' 
 
*** 
 
The City guard must have had the chance to celebrate Yule because he walked unsteadily, 
banging his halberd into signs and through a slurred proclamation announced that it was the 
tenth of the clock, when in fact it was well after midnight. 
'You'll have to go to Beauclair alone,' Reynart de Bois-Fresnes said soon after they left 
the tavern. 'I shall stay in the city. Good night, Geralt.' 
The Witcher knew that his friend had a love affair with a certain lady. Whose husband is 
often on the road for business. He never talked about it because men do not talk of such 
things. 
'Good night, Reynart. Take care of the skoffin. Don't let it spoil.' 
'It's freezing.' 
It was freezing. The streets were empty and dark. The moon shone on the roofs, shining 
like diamonds on the ice that hung from the eaves. Roach's horseshoes rang against the 
pavement. 
Roach, thought the witcher as he headed towards the palace of Beauclair, a graceful grey 
mare, a gift from Anna Henrietta. And Dandelion. 
He urged his horse forwards. Hurrying up. 
 
*** 
 
The next day after the banquet they all met for breakfast, they became accustomed to 
going straight to the castle kitchen. For some reason, they were always welcome and always 
found something for them in the pots, pans or grills, usually bread, bacon, cheese or maybe 
pickled mushrooms. They never missed a jar or two of red or white from the famous local 
vineyards. 
They went there every morning for the two weeks they spent in Beauclair – Geralt, Regis, 
Cahir, Milva and Angouleme. Only Dandelion had breakfast elsewhere. 
'He,' Angouleme slathered some bread with butter, 'has his bacon brought to him in bed! 
With everyone bowing to him!' 
Geralt was willing to believe that the girl was right. And this morning decided to check it 
out. 
 
*** 
 
He found Dandelion in the Knights Hall. The poet wore a crimson beret as big as a loaf of 
bread and was wearing a doublet of the same colour richly embroidered with gold thread. He 

was sitting on a stool with his lute on his knees and his head was nodding carelessly in 
answer to the flattery of the courtiers and ladies who circled around him. 
Anna Henrietta was thankfully not in sight, so Geralt unhesitatingly violated etiquette and 
headed straight for him friend. Dandelion saw him coming, swelled and with an imperious 
gesture said, 'Ladies and gentlemen, please leave us in private. Also the servants are allow to 
leave.' 
He clapped his hands and before the echo of his clap returned from the vaulted ceiling of 
the hall, only the two of them stood there – and the smell of perfume, which hovered in the 
air after the ladies left. 
'Pretty fun.' Geralt said without exaggeration, 'this is the chase, huh? It must be a nice 
feeling to give orders or clap or a monarchical frown. See how they retreat, like crabs, 
bending before you in reverence. Pretty fun, right? Sir Favourite?' 
Dandelion scowled. 
'Are you here for something specific,' he said gruffly, 'or just this crap?' 
'About something very specific.' 
'Speak, I'm listening.' 
'I need three riding horses. For me, Cahir and Angouleme. And two wagons, loaded with 
rations and feed. Can you ask for them from your Duchess? You have served long enough, I 
hope?' 
'No problem,' Dandelion tuned his lute not looking at the witcher. 'But I'm surprised by 
your haste. I would say it surprises me as much as your silly sarcasm.' 
'My urgency surprises you?' 
'Just so you know. October is over and the weather deteriorates noticeably. Snow will be 
falling in the passes any day now.' 
'And you wonder at my hurry,' the witcher nodded. 'But that reminds me, get more warm 
clothing. Fur.' 
'I thought,' Dandelion said slowly, 'that we would wait out the winter here. That we 
would be here...' 
'I you like,' Geralt said without thinking, 'you can stay.' 
'Yes,' Dandelion put his lute aside and stood up. 'I think I will stay.' 
 The witcher gasped audibly. He was silent. He looked at the tapestry, which depicted an 
imaginary fight between a titan and a dragon. The titan was standing on two left feet, trying 
to break the dragon's jaw, and the dragon did not look too thrilled. 
'I'm staying,' Dandelion repeated. 'I love Anarietta. And she loves me.' 
Geralt remained silent. 
'I will arrange the horses,' Dandelion promised. 'For you, I'll prepare a thoroughbred 
mare named Roach, of course. For the journey you will also get food, equipment and warm 
clothing. But honestly, I advise you to wait until spring. Anarietta...' 
'Do I hear you correctly?' the Witcher finally regained his voice. 'Are my ears deceiving 
me?' 
'Your reason has certainly failed,' snapped the troubadour, 'How are you other senses, I 
don't know. But to be safe I will repeat – Anarietta and I love you. Abide in Toussaint. With 
her.' 
'Like what? A lover? A favourite? Or maybe the Prince Consort?' 
'Formal and legal status doesn't mean anything to me,' Dandelion admitted frankly. 'But 
you can't rule out anything. Marriage or not.' 
Geralt was silent again, contemplating the titan's battle against the dragon. 
'Dandelion,' he said finally. 'If you've been drinking, sober up quickly. If you haven't 
been drinking, then let's have a drink. Then we'll talk.' 
'I don't quite understand,' Dandelion said frowning. 'What are you saying?' 

'Think a minute.' 
'Are you embarrassed about my relationship with Anarietta? Are you asking me to 
reconsider it? Don't worry, I've thought about it. Anarietta loves me...' 
'Have you ever heard a saying,' said Geralt, 'that princesses leap after love like hares? 
Even if Anarietta is not so frivolous, forgive my candour, it seems to me, that...' 
'What?' 
'That it is only in fairy tales that Duchesses marry musicians.' 
'First of all,' snapped Dandelion, 'Even such an ignoramus like you should have heard of 
morganatic marriages. Do I have to get out some examples from ancient and recent history? 
Secondly, it may surprise you, but I am not of an insignificances. My family, de Lettenhove, 
are derived from...' 
'I'm listening to you,' Geralt cut him off again, 'and I don't believe my own ears. Is this 
really my friend Dandelion, who is speaking such crap? If it is indeed my friend, Dandelion, 
has he lost all shred of reason? Is it really Dandelion, whom I had known to be a realist, who 
is now living in a sphere of illusion? Open your eyes, you idiot!' 
'Oh,' the troubadour said slowly, clenching his lips. 'The roles are reversed. I am blind, 
but you have become a sober and factual observer. It used to be the opposite. And what is this 
curious thing that I cannot see? Huh? What have I, according to you, closed my eyes too?' 
'Most of all,' said the witcher, 'that your chosen duchess is arrogant and ridiculous and 
spoiled. She is a big child for whom you are nothing but a toy, which she will discard without 
reproach as soon as a new musician appears with a fascinating new repertoire.' 
'What you say is low and vulgar. I hope you realise?' 
'I realise that you have gone completely mad, Dandelion.' 
The poet was silent, stroking the neck of his lute. It took some time before he spoke 
again. 
'We came out of Brokilon on a joy expedition. Without the slightest chance of success, 
we followed a mirage, a dream, a desire, an unattainable ideal. We set off in pursuit like 
crazy fools. But I, Geralt, I did not say a word of complaint. I did not call you crazy or 
ridicule you. Because you were filled with hope and love. They guided you on this insane 
mission. And me too. But I have caught up with a mirage, and I was lucky enough that the 
dream came true. My mission has ended. I have found what is hard to find. And I cannot give 
it up. Is that supposed to be madness? I'd be a fool if I left.' 
Geralt was silent as long as Dandelion had been before. 
'Poetry,' he said. 'In that you have no equal. I do not have anything to say, you have 
convinced me with your arguments. Farewell, Dandelion.' 
'Farewell, Geralt.' 
 
*** 
 
The library of the palace was indeed huge. The room which housed it was at least twice 
the size of the Knights Hall, where he had left Dandelion. The library had a glass ceiling, 
through which sunlight poured. Geralt imagined, however, that in summer it would heat up 
like hell. 
The passages between the shelves were so narrow that they had to walk very carefully to 
avoid knocking over stacks of books. 
'Here I am,' he heard a call. 
The center of the library disappeared among piles of books. Many lay completely 
disordered, one by one or in clusters. 
'Here, Geralt.' 

He found here between the bookish canyons and gorges. She was kneeling among 
scattered books, fanning them and sorting. She wore a modest grey dress pulled up slightly 
for comfort. Geralt saw that the view was very attractive. 
'Do not be scared of this mess,' she said wiping her forehead with her forearm, because 
her hands were covered in thin silk gloves, dirty from dust. 'They are performing inventory 
and cataloguing. But they have stopped at my request. I wanted to be alone in the library. I 
cannot work when a stranger is gazing at the back of my neck.' 
'I'm sorry. Do you want me to leave?' 
'You're not a stranger,' she narrowed her green eyes. 'Your gaze does not bother me... 
On the contrary, it makes me happy. Don't just stand there. Sit down her on the books.' 
He sat down on a hardcover encyclopaedia. 
'This is a mess,' Fringilla made a sweeping gesture around her, 'is going to make my job 
easier. I can get to the volumes that would normally lie at the bottom of a pile and would be 
impossible to move. The court librarians moved mountains of papers and parchments, so 
some of the real jewels of literature can see the light of day, some true rarities. Look. Have 
you ever see this?' 
'Speculum Aureum? I've seen it.' 
'I forgot, sorry. You've seen a lot. That was a compliment, not sarcasm. But look at this 
one, Gesta Regum. From this we begin to understand who your Ciri really is and what blood 
flows in her viens... You know, you look even more sour than usual. What is the reason?' 
'Dandelion.' 
'Will you tell me about it?' 
He spoke. Fringilla listened, sitting with her legs crossed on the pile of books. 
'Hmmm,' she said when he had finished. 'I admit that I expected something similar. I 
have noticed Anarietta showing unmistakable signs of falling in love.' 
'Falling in love?' he raised his eyebrows. 'Or a noble whim?' 
'Do you not believe,' she looked at him sharply, 'of a pure and sincere love?' 
'My belief or disbelief,' he said, 'has nothing to do with it. It is Dandelion and his 
obsessive...' 
He suddenly lost confidence and did not finish. 
'With love,' Fringilla said, 'it is like nervous cramps. You cannot even be effect until they 
attack, and you cannot even imagine something like that. And when you describe it, nobody 
would believe it.' 
'Some part does,' agreed the witcher. 'But there are also differences. Against nervous 
cramps common sense won't protect you. And there is no cure.' 
'Love mocks sense. That is part of its charm and beauty.' 
'Stupidity rather.' 
She got up and approached him while taking off her gloves. Her eyes gave the feeling of 
being deep and dark behind the curtain of her lashes. She smelled of amber, roses, the dust 
from the library, aging paper and printing ink. Those smells had nothing to do with 
aphrodisiacs – and yet for him they worked. 
'You do not believe,' her voice changed, 'in love at first sight? Fatal attraction? The 
collision of celestial bodies?' 
She reached out and put her hands on his shoulders. He grabbed her around the waist. Her 
face approached reluctantly, wary, as if afraid to frighten some very timid creature. 
And then the celestial bodies collided and the earth moved. 
They fell in a pile of parchment that scattered everywhere under their weight. Geralt stuck 
his nose into Fringilla's neckline. He hugged her and grabbed her knee. He rolled up her skirt 
to her waist knocking over several books, including Lives of the Prophets, full of mysterious 
illustrations, as well as De Haemorrhoidibus, an interesting, though controversial medical 

treatise. The witcher pushed aside volumes and pulled at the dress impatiently. Fringilla 
eagerly raised her hips. 
Something pushed against her shoulder. She turned her head. Learning the Art of 
Midwifery. Quickly, so as not to tempt the devil, she looked in the other direction. The 
Sulphurous Hot Springs. In fact it was getting warmer. From the corner of her eye she saw an 
open book which rested by her head. Reflections on Inevitable Death. Even better, she 
thought. 
The witcher struggled with her panties. She raised her hips, but this time only slightly, so 
that it look like a random movement and not defiant help. She did not know him and did not 
know to respond. Whether he prefers that a woman knows what she wants, or does he like a 
woman who pretends she doesn't know. And if he would be discouraged by panties that 
offered resistance. 
The witcher, however, seemed to show no signs of discouragement. You could say the 
contrary. Seeing that it was time, Fringilla eagerly spread her legs, bringing down books and 
pamphlets stacked in piles, which poured over them like an avalanche. A heavy, leather 
bound copy of Mortgage Law painfully struck her in the ribs and the Codex Diphmaticus, 
adorned with brass fittings, fell on Geralt's wrist. Geralt assessed and took advantage of the 
situation – placing the large tome where it was necessary. Fringilla squeaked because the 
fittings were cold. But only for a moment. 
She gasped loudly, letting go of the witcher's hair and throwing her hands out, grasping 
both hands into the surrounding books, he left hand hold a book on geometry and her right 
hold a book about reptiles and amphibians. Geralt, who held her by the hips, unwittingly 
knocked over another pile of books, he was too preoccupied to worry about the pages that 
rained down on them. 
Fringilla moaned uncontrollably, her head buried into the book Reflections on Inevitable 
Death. 
Fringilla moaned again. The witcher did not hear it because her thighs were tightly 
squeezing his ears. He knocked over The History of Wars and Sciences Needed for a Happy 
Life. He fought with the buttons and hooks of her dress, inadvertently reading the inscriptions 
on covers and spines of books. At the level of Fringilla's waist lay Breeding Animals, in close 
proximity to her lovely breasts was a hard critical publication about useless and corrupt civil 
servants, and below that an economic study called Economics and Science – How to create, 
distribute and consume wealth. 
Shelves swayed and columns of books collapsed like rocks in a strong earthquake. With a 
thud, from the shelf fell a first edition copy of De Larvis Scenicis et figuris comicis, followed 
by a conventional and well-known book about inventory release and commands of training 
troops and a book on the Heraldry of Jan de Attire adorned with the beautiful engravings. 
The witcher moaned, dropping more volumes to the floor with a kick from his leg. 
Fringilla leaned back and cried out, hitting with her heel a pile of books. A copy of 
Reflections and Meditations for Every Day of the Year, an anonymous and interesting work, 
somehow appeared on Geralt's back. 
Geralt read over her shoulder, finding out whether he wanted to or not, notes that had 
been written by a doctor named Albertus Rivus, in a book called Academia Cintensis, printed 
by the master typographer Johann Froben Junior in the second year of the reign of His 
Majesty King Corbertt. 
 Suddenly there was a silence in which only the faint sound of rustling apges could be 
heard. 
What should I do, Fringilla wondered, lightly touching the hard edges of Geralt's side and 
a copy of the Reflections on the Nature of Things. Make a suggestion? Or wait for him to 
make a suggestion? What would he think of me? But what if he doesn't make a suggestion? 

'Let's find a bed,' the witcher solved her dilemma. 'It's not right to treat books this way.' 
 
*** 
 
We found a bed, Geralt remembered, he rode straight into an alley and with a kick spurred 
into a gallop. We found the bed in her chambers in the alcove. We made love to each other as 
if obsessed, eagerly, greedily, as if after years of celibacy and as if celibacy was threatening 
again. 
We talked of many things. We told about ourselves very trivial truths. We told ourselves 
very beautiful lies. But those lies, even though they were lies, were not meant to be calculate 
or to deceive. 
With a strong kick, he forced Roach into a gallop directly towards a clump of roses 
covered by snow and forced her to jump. 
We made love. And we talked. And our lies were becoming more beautiful and 
increasingly false. 
Two months. From October to Yule. 
Two months of furious, greedy, violent love. 
Roach's horseshoes clattered on the palace courtyard of Beauclair. 
 
*** 
 
Quickly and quietly he walked through the corridors. No one saw him or heard him. 
Neither the Guardsmen quenching their boredom with chatter or the tired butlers. He did not 
even make the candle flames waver as he passed by them. 
He walked around the castle kitchens. But he did not stop or go in to join his companions, 
who at this late hour, had developed a taste for a jug of wine and something to eat. He stood 
in the darkness and listened. 
Angouleme was speaking. 
'This city is under a spell, all of Toussaint. A charm that hangs over the whole valley. 
And now on this particular palace. I wondered about Dandelion, I wondered about Geralt, but 
now it makes me kind of dizzy to be here and I feel a strange tingling... I've even found 
myself... Fuck, what did I tell you! We have to get out of here as quickly as possible!' 
'We must talk to Geralt,' muttered Milva. 'We must talk to him.' 
'Yes, talk to him,' Cahir said sarcastically, 'in one of those rare moments, where he is 
available. Hunting witches and monsters are the only activities that he has performed in the 
last two months.' 
'And you,' Angouleme snorted,' can only be caught while walking in the park playing 
with the baronesses. This is what happens in spellbound, Toussaint. Regis vanishes at night; 
my aunty had her Baron...' 
'Shut up, brat! And don't call me your aunty!' 
'Come, come!' Regis stepped between the two ladies. 'Girls, be at peace. Milva, 
Angouleme, don't argue. Hostility ruins, friendship builds. It is said that Her Ladyship the 
Duchess and likes Dandelion, her country, the palace, bread, and pickles. Would you like 
some wine?' 
Milva released a heavy sigh. 
'We have been here too long! Too long, I tell you, sitting here in idleness. Fooling 
around.' 
'Nicely put,' said Cahir. 'Very nice.' 
Geralt carefully moved away. As noiselessly as a bat. 
 

*** 
 
Quickly and silently he walked down the corridors. No one saw or heard him. Neither the 
guards nor the valets. Not even the candle flames flickered as he passes the chandeliers. A rat 
heard him and poked out its bearded nose. But it was not scared. He was known here. 
He went this way often. 
The bedroom smelled of spells, amber, rose and a woman sleeping. But Fringilla was not 
asleep. She sat on the bed and tossed back the covers; the sight charmed him and made him 
lose control. 
'You've finally arrived,' she said, stretching. 'Undress and come here quickly. Very, very 
quickly.' 
 
*** 
 
She went through the halls quickly and quietly. No one saw or heard her. Neither the 
soldiers who gossiped lazily with the guards or the footmen or the pages. Not even the candle 
flames flickered as she passed the chandeliers. A rat heard her and lifted up its hairy nose and 
followed her with its beady eyes. But it was not frightened. She was known here. 
She passed this way often. 
 
*** 
 
In the castle of Beauclair was a secret passage behind a door at the end of a chamber, 
which nobody knew about. Neither the current lady of the castle, the Duchess Anarietta, nor 
her ancestor, Ademarta, First Lady of the Castle. Neither the famous architect, Pierre 
Faramond who renovated the building from top to bottom, nor the master masons who 
worked on Faramond's project. The existence of the passage was not even known by the 
Chamberlain Le Goff, who was thought to know everything about Beauclair. 
The passage and the room, masked by a powerful illusion, were only known by the 
castles builders – Elves. Later, when the elves left the castle and were replaced by people, 
only a handful knew about the secret which was guarded closely by a small group of wizards 
from the princely family. Most knowledgeable of them all was Master of the Arcane, Artorios 
Vigo, a respected specialist in all kinds of illusion, whose young niece, Fringilla inherited her 
uncle's talent and also became a witch. 
Fringilla stopped in front of a bare wall between two columns decorated with a floral 
motif. With a whisper and a quick gesture, a false wall disappeared. Beyond was revealed a 
corridor which seemingly led to a dead end. At the end of the corridor, however, was another 
door masked by illusion. And behind this door was a dark room. 
Fringilla entered and without wasting time, started the tele-communicator. Oval mirrors 
which had stood dark started to brighten up the dark room. Through the mirror was revealed a 
hall, in which sat a round table surrounded by women. Nine women. 
'We are listening, Fringilla,' said Philippa Eilhart. 'Do you have any news?' 
'Unfortunately not,' replied Fringilla. 'Nothing since the last report. Nothing from any 
attempt at scanning.' 
'This is bad,' said Philippa. 'We expected you to find something. Tell us, has the witcher 
calmed down, at least? Can you keep him in Toussaint until May?' 
Fringilla was silent for a moment. She had not the slightest intention of telling the lodge 
that during the last two weeks the witcher had called her Yennefer twice – and at times, when 
she had every right to be called by her own name. However the lodge had a right to expect 
from her the truth. Sincerity. And some useful findings. 

'No,' she said at last. 'Probably not until May. But I will do everything in my power to 
keep him as long as possible.' 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Korr, a monster from the species-rich family of Strigiformes (qv), depending on the area, also 
called Kourican, Korreds, Rutterkin, Rumpelstiltskin, Whirlers, or Mesmers. You can say one 
thing about it - that it is a fiend beyond compare. Such devilishly filthy and abhorrent carrion 
is it that we will neither remember nor write of its customs or even its appearance, for verily 
we say unto you: Any word is too good for this son of a bitch. 
 
Physiologus 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

