Chapter Seven 

 

 

'They're safe,' confirmed the vampire, spurring his mule, Draakul. 'All three of them – 
Milva, Dandelion and of course, Angouleme, who in time overtook us in the valley of 
Sansretour and told us everything, without sparing us the picturesque words. I could never 
understand why you humans have so many curses and insults related to the spheres of 
eroticism. After all, sex is beautiful and is associated with beauty, joy and pleasure. How can 
you use the names of the reproductive organs in such vulgar synonyms...' 

'Stick to the topic, Regis,' Geralt interrupted. 

'Of course, I'm sorry. Angouleme warned us of the approaching bandits and we 
immediately crossed the border into Toussaint. In truth, Milva was against it, and was eager 
to turn around and seek you both out. I managed to persuade her. And Dandelion, instead of 
rejoicing in the asylum, which the duchy gives, showed considerable displeasure... Any idea 
what our poet is so afraid of in Toussaint?' 

'I don't know, but I can guess,' Geralt said sourly. 'Because it would not be the first place 
where our friend, the bard visited. Now he has settled down a little, because he is keeping 
decent company, but in his youth he was not known for his holiness. I would say that the only 
people who were safe from him were those women who jumped into the water or who were 
able to climb to the tops of very tall trees. And often the husbands, fiancés, fathers and 
brothers frequently showed him hostility, you can be sure. In Toussaint there is undoubtedly a 
husband, which the sight of Dandelion may revive memories... But this is not important. 
Let's get back to the facts. What about the pursuers? I hope you...' 

'I do not think,' Regis smiled, 'they would have followed us into Toussaint. The border is 
full of knights-errant, who are extremely bored and looking for any excuse to fight, In 
addition, we joined a group of pilgrims on the border who were on their way to the sacred 
groves of Myrkvid. A place that inspires fear. Even the pilgrims, the sick and the lame who 
make the far journey to Myrkvid for healing, remain in the camps on the outskirts of the 
forest and do not dare enter its depths. It is said that those who dares enter the sacred groves 
will be burned in a slow fire inside a wicker hag.' 

Geralt gasped. 

'Really...' 

'Of course,' the vampire interrupted him again. 'In the Myrkvid Forest dwell Druids. 
Those who formerly lived in Angra, in Caed Dhu, then migrated to Loc Monduirn and finally 
to Myrkvid in Toussaint. We were destined to eventually meet with them. Do you not 
remember that I said that long ago.' 


Geralt took a deep breath. Cahir was riding behind him. 

'Is your friend among these Druids?' 

The vampire smiled again. 

'They are not my friend, but an acquaintance,' he explained. 'Yes, she is among them. 
She has even been promoted. She leads the whole circle.' 

'A hierophant?' 

'A flaminica. That is what a woman is called when she achieves the highest druidic title. 
Only men are called hierophants.' 

'True, I forgot. So Milva and the rest...' 

'They are now under the protection of the Circle and the flaminica,' as was his custom, 
the vampire answered the question while the question was still being asked. 'For my part, I 
hastened to come and fetch you. A strange thing happened. The flaminica, when I began to 
present our case, would not let me finish. She said that she already knew everything. She said 
that they had been expecting our visit for some time...' 

'How?' 

'I could not hide my disbelief,' the vampire stopped the mule, stood in the stirrups and 
looked around. 

'Looking for someone or something?' Cahir asked. 

'I'm not looking, I've found. Dismount.' 

'We should go as quickly as possible...' 

'Dismount. I'll explain everything to you.' 

They had to speak louder to be understood because of the sound of a waterfall falling 
from a considerable height on a vertical wall of a rocky cliff. Down below where the 
waterfall spilled into a large lake, the rock opened into the black mouth of a cave. 

'Yes, here is the place,' Regis confirmed the assumptions of the witcher. 'I came to meet 
you because I was ordered to go here. You have to enter that cave. I told you, the Druids 
knew about you, knew about Ciri and knew of our mission. And they heard it all through the 
person living in there. This person, if we believe the Druids, wants to talk to you.' 

'If we believe the Druids' Geralt repeated with emphasis. 'I've been here before. I know 
what lives in the deep caves under Devil's Mountain. Different people live there. But the 
overwhelming majority you cannot talk to unless it is with a sword. What else did you Druid 
say? What else do I have to believe?' 


'She specifically,' the vampire looked into Geralt's shining eyes, 'made me understand 
that she does not like individuals that destroy and slay living nature in general, and that 
includes witchers in particular. I explained to her that currently you are a rather titular 
Witcher. That absolutely does not bother nature, as long as the latter is not bothering you. 
The flaminica, you should know is a woman of extraordinary intelligence, she realised that 
you left the witcher's path not due to a change in your mind-set, but because you were forced 
by circumstances. 'I know very well,' she told me, 'that misfortune has befallen someone 
close to the witcher. The witcher was forced to abandon the witcher's path and hurry to the 
rescue...'' 

Geralt did not comment but his look was so elegant that the vampire hastened to explain. 

'She said, quote, 'The Witcher, not being a sorcerer, must prove himself capable of 
humility and sacrifice. He must enter into the dark depths of the earth. Disarmed. 
Abandoning all weapons, any sharp iron. All evil thoughts. And aggression, rage, anger or 
pride. He must enter with humility. And once there, in the depths of the earth, the humble 
witcher will find the answers to the questions that torment him. He will find answers to many 
questions. But is he stays, the witcher, will never learn anything.' Those were her words.' 

Geralt spat towards the waterfall and the cave. 

'It seems like an inept game,' he said. 'A distraction. Entertainment. Divination, sacrifice, 
a mysterious meeting in the basement, answers to all questions... Such hackneyed tricks you 
might encounter only from wandering storytellers. Someone here is mocking me. In the best 
case. And if this is not a mockery...' 

'I would not call it a mockery under any circumstance,' Regis said firmly. 'Under no 
circumstances, Geralt of Rivia.' 

'So, what is it? One of the Druid's famous oddities?' 

'We will not know,' said Cahir, 'until you find out. Come on, Geralt, we'll go in there 
together...' 

'No,' the vampire shook his head. 'The flaminica was categorical in this regard. The 
Witcher has to go in there by himself. Without weapons. Give me your sword. I'll take care 
of it while you are gone.' 

'I'll be damned...' Geralt started, but Regis interrupted with a quick gesture. 

'Give me your sword,' he extended his hand. 'And if you have any other weapons, leave 
them with me as well. Think about the words of the flaminica. No aggression. Sacrifice. 
Humility.' 

'Do you know who I'll meet in there? Who... or what is waiting for me in this cave?' 

'No, I do not know. All kinds of creatures inhabit the underground passages of the 
Gorgon.' 


'I'll be damned!' 

'That cannot be ruled out,' he said gravely. 'But you have to undertake the risk. There is 
nothing else you can do.' 

 

*** 

 

He was right. As expected at the entrance of the cave was strewn with an impressive pile 
of skulls, ribs, bones and vertebrae. Yet, he could not smell the odour of decay. These 
remnants of earthly life were apparently centuries old and fulfilled the role of decoration to 
scare intruders. 

Or so he thought. 

He entered the darkness, bones crackled and snapped under his feet. His eyes quickly 
adapted to the darkness. He found himself in a huge cave with a rocky dome, whose size 
could not be estimated because the dimensions were lost and disappeared in a forest of 
stalactites that hung from the ceiling like colourful branches. From the floor grew white and 
pink stalagmites, thick at the base and tapering to a tip. Some of the peaks reached high 
above the head of the witcher. Some stalagmites joined at the top to stalactites, forming 
columns. The only sound echoing in the stone chamber was the echo of falling water drops. 

He walked straight ahead, deeper into the cave. He knew he was being watched. 

The lack of a sword on his back was strongly felt, and clearly unwelcome. As the lack of 
a tooth that has been recently broken. 

He slowed his pace. 

What he had taken a second before as a bunch of round boulders at the foot of a 
stalagmite was now looking at him with great glowing eyes. The compact mass of dusty grey 
tuffs opened their huge jaws and their conical fangs gleamed. 

Barbegazi. 

He walked slowly and carefully settling his feet. The Barbegazi were everywhere, large, 
medium and small ones lay in his way, with no intention of departing. So far they had 
behaved calmly, but he was not sure what would happen if he stepped on one. He could not 
hold a straight course and had to weave through the forest of stalagmites. Cold water from the 
ceiling dripped down on him. 

The Barbegazi – there were still more – accompanied him at every turn, crossing and 
rolling over the floor. He could hear their panting and gasping. He could fell their pungent, 
sour smell. 


He had to stop. Between two columns, at a place where there was no other way around, a 
huge Echinops blocked the way, bristling with long masses of spikes. Geralt swallowed. 
Echinops could fire spikes at a distance up to ten feet. The spikes had an unpleasant feature – 
once driven into the body they shattered and the sharp tip penetrated and travelled deeper and 
deeper into the body, until it eventually reached a sensitive organ. 

'The stupid Witcher,' he heard from the darkness. 'The cowardly Witcher! He is afraid, 
ha, ha!' 

The voice sounded strange and alien, but Geralt had heard voice like that more than once. 
Thus spoke beings who were not used to communicating with the aid of articulate speech, 
they had strange accents and intonation, with unnaturally lengthened syllables. 

'Foolish Witcher! Foolish Witcher!' 

He declined to say anything. He bit his lip and pass the echinopsae. The spines of the 
monster waved like the tentacles of an anemone. But only for a moment, the echinopsae 
froze, then went back to looking like a large clump of mash grass. 

Two huge Barbegazi crossed his path, muttering and growling. From above, from the top 
of the cave, came the flutter of membranous wings and the cackling and hissing, a sure sign 
of the presence of vespertyls. 

'Here comes the murderer! The butcher! The Witcher!' 

From the darkness came the same voice he had heard previously. 

'He has come here! He has dared! But, the butcher has no sword! How will he kill? With 
his gaze? Ha, ha, ha!' 

'Maybe,' there was a second voice, with an even more unnatural articulation, 'we will kill 
him? Hmmm?' 

The barbegazi croaked in a loud chorus. One of them, as big as a ripe pumpkin, walked 
after Geralt and snapped hit teeth together on his heels. The witcher stifled the curse that 
came to his lips. He continued. The water dripping from the stalactites, created a silvery echo. 

Something clung to his leg. He refrained from shaking it off violently. 

The creature was small, a little larger than a Pekingese dog. It also resembled a 
Pekingese, in the face. The rest looked like a monkey. Geralt had no idea what it was. He'd 
never seen anything like it. 

'Witcher!' articulated the thing, which was clearly not a Pekingese, tightly clinging to 
Geralt's boot. 'The Witcher! You son of a bitch!' 

'Go away,' he growled through clenched teeth. 'Let go of my boot, or I'll kick your ass.' 


The Barbegazi muttered loudly. Something bellowed in the darkness. Geralt did not know 
what it was. I sounded like a cow, but the witcher bet anything that it was no cow. 

'Witcher, son of a bitch.' 

'Let go of my boot,' he repeated, controlling himself with difficulty. 'I came here in 
peace, unarmed. You are hindering...' 

He stopped and choked on a wave of stench which made his eyes water and gave him 
goose bumps. 

The being clinging to his leg rolled its eyes and defecated directly onto his boot. The foul 
stench was accompanied by sounds even more disgusting. 

He cursed the situation adequately and pushed the troublesome intruder off of his leg. Far 
more gently then it deserved. Even so what he feared happened. 

'He kicked it!' something shouted in the dark, above the hurricane of snorting from the 
barbegazi. 'He kicked it! He has hurt the poor creature!' 

The closes Barbegazi grabbed onto his feet. He felt their strong, hard as stone paws on his 
feet and ankles, immobilising him. He did not defend himself, he was resigned. The fur of the 
largest and most aggressive rubbed up against his offensive boot. They tugged on his clothes 
and he sat down. Something big crawled from a stalactite and dropped to the ground. He 
knew what it was. A knocker. He was squat, dumpy, shaggy, with bowed legs and broad 
shoulders, with a huge red beard. 

As the knocker approached the ground trembled, as if it was not one knocker approaching 
but a Clydesdale. Although they seemed comical his feet were over half a foot long each. 

The knocker bent over him and emanated the stench of vodka. That bastard is distilling 
his own moonshine here, Geralt thought mechanically. 

'You kicked a defenceless little creature, witcher,' the knocker breathed alcoholic 
vapours into his face. 'Without any reason you attacked a little, defenceless, innocent 
creature. We knew we could not trust you. You are aggressive. You posses the instincts of a 
murderer. How many of us have you killed, you bastard?' 

There seemed no appropriate answer. 

'Ooh!' the knocker further choked him with the stench of alcohol. 'I've dreamed of this 
since childhood! Since childhood! Finally my dreams are being fulfilled. Look to the left.' 

He looked like a fool. He received a fist right on the jaw and saw an explosion of 
brightness. 

'Ooh!' the knocker showed his large curved teeth from inside his thick, smelly beard. 
'I've dreamed of this since childhood! Look to the right.' 


'Enough,' from somewhere in the depths of the cave came a loud and sonorous command. 
'Enough of these games and practical jokes. Please let him go.' 

Geralt spat out blood from his cut lip. He washed his boot in a steam of water running 
down the wall. The dog faced Pekingese smiled sarcastically, but from a safe distance. The 
knocker also smiled as he massaged his fist. 

'Go, witcher,' he barked. 'Go to the one calling you. I'll wait. You will still have to come 
back this way.' 

 

*** 

 

The cave into which he entered was surprisingly full of light. Through holes in the roof 
brightness penetrated into the cave, it fell onto sedimentary formations and caused a spectacle 
of colour and glitter. In addition to this, in the air hung a magic ball of fiery light, which was 
reflected by the quartz on the walls. Despite all the light, the edges of the cavern were 
cloaked in darkness, with columns of stalagmites disappearing into the blackness. 

On one wall, which nature had prepared for that purpose, was someone creating a huge 
painting. The painter was a tall elf with blond hair, wearing a paint-stained robe. The magical 
light seemed to reflect off of him creating a halo around his head. 

'Sit,' said the elf, pointing to a boulder, not taking his eyes from the painting. 'Did they 
hurt you?' 

'No. Not really.' 

'You'll have to forgive them.' 

'Indeed. I have to.' 

'They are like children. They were terribly glad of your coming.' 

'I've seen.' 

The elf looked at him. 

'Sit down,' he repeated. 'In a moment I will be at your disposal. I'm finishing.' 

 What the elf was finishing was a stylised animal, probably a buffalo. At present only the 
outline was complete, from the imposing horns to the no less wonderful tail. Geralt sat on the 
boulder mentioned and promised himself to remain patient and humble – to the limits of the 
possible. 


The elf, whistling softly through his teeth, dipped a brush into a container of paint and 
painted with rapid movements, a purple buffalo. After a moment of reflection he painted tiger 
stripes on the side of the animal. 

Geralt looked at him in silence. 

Finally the elf took a step back in order to access from a distance the finished work – a 
hunting scene. The striped, purple buffalo was being chased by carelessly sketched figures of 
people with bows and spears. 

'What is that supposed to be?' Geralt could not resist. 

The elf looked at him briefly, putting the clean end of the brush to his lips. 

'It is,' he said, 'a prehistoric painting done by primitive people who lived in a cave 
thousands of years ago and worked mainly as hunters of the long extinct purple buffalo. 
Some of the prehistoric hunters were artists and felt a deep need to respond artistically. To 
perpetuate what was in their souls.' 

'Fascinating.' 

'Of course,' admitted the elf. 'Your scientists wander for years through caves looking for 
traces of prehistoric man. And whenever they find them, they are fascinated beyond measure. 
Since it provides evidence that you are not strangers in this land and in this world. Proof that 
your ancestors lived here for centuries, so that the world belongs to your heirs. Well, every 
race is entitled to some roots. Including yours, humans, whose roots should be sort in large 
trees. Ha, a funny pun, is it not? Worthy of an epigram. Do you like poetry? What else can 
you think to paint here?' 

'Draw a picture of prehistoric hunters with enormous erected penises.' 

'That's a good idea,' the elf dipped the brush into the paint. 'Phallic worship was typical 
of early civilizations. It can also be used to forge the theory that the human race suffers from 
physical degeneration. The ancestors had phalluses the size of batons, and the descendants 
had no more than ridiculous twigs... Thank you, witcher.' 

'You're welcome. I have one more suggestion – The paint looks too fresh to be 
prehistoric.' 

'Do not worry, after three or four days the colours will fade due to the influence of the 
salt and moisture that runs down the wall and the image will become so prehistoric that your 
scientists will be mad with joy once they find it. I bet my shoes that not even the brightest of 
them will recognise my trick.' 

'They recognise it.' 

'How?' 

'Because you won't be able to stop yourself from signing your masterpiece.' 


The elf laughed dryly. 

'Exactly. You've guessed me correctly. Oh, my flames of vanity, how hard it is for the 
artist in me to quench my soul. I already signed the painting. Behold, here.' 

'Isn't that a dragonfly?' 

'No it is an ideogram indication my name. My name is Creavan Espane aep Caomhan 
Macha. For convenience I use the alias Avallac'h. You can address me so.' 

'As you please.' 

'And you are Geralt of Rivia. You're a witcher. However, you do not currently chase 
monsters and beasts, you are looking for missing girls.' 

'The news spreads amazingly fast. And surprisingly far. And surprisingly deep. 
Apparently you had predicted I would show up here. So I'm guessing that you can predict the 
future?' 

'Predicting the future,' Avallac'h wiped his hands on a rag, 'anyone can do. And 
everybody does, because it is easy. The hard part is predicting it accurately.' 

'An elegant argument and worthy of an epigram. You, clearly, can predict it accurately.' 

'All too often, my dear Geralt, I know many things and I do many things. Evidence of this 
is suggested by my – how you would say, people. My official title is 'Aen Saevherne'.' 

'Knowing one.' 

'Exactly.' 

'And you would be willing to share your knowledge?' 

Avallac'h paused. 

'Share?' he at last drawled. 'With you? My dear witcher, something like that is a great 
privilege and privileges are only shared with equals. And why would I, an elf, a Knowing 
one, a member of the elite, why would I share anything with the descendant of a being who 
barely a few million years ago evolved from a monkey, rat, jackal or other mammal? A being 
who needed around two million years to discover that using their two hairy hands they can 
make a primitive tool out of a bone? And after which he got that cone and put it in his anus, 
groaning with happiness?' 

The elf was silent; he turned and stared at his painting. 

'Why,' he said mockingly, 'do you dare hope that I will share with you any knowledge, 
human? Tell me.' 

Geralt wiped the remnants of shit from his boot. 


'I guess because,' he said, 'it's inevitable.' 

The elf turned abruptly. 

'What,' he asked through clenched teeth, 'is inevitable?' 

'The fact that it will only that another few years,' Geralt did not raise his voice, 'and 
people will simple take all the knowledge, regardless of whether anyone wanted to share it 
with them or not. That includes the knowledge that you, an elf and a Knowing one,, 
cunningly hiding behind your rock frescoes. Hoping that people will not want to smash your 
wall with pickaxes and destroy your painting with false evidence of their ancient history. 
What do you say, my flame of vanity?' 

 The elf snorted. Surprisingly, quite amused. 

'Oh yes,' he said. 'Vanity is indeed linked to stupidity if I believed that you would stop 
before destroying everything. You destroy everything you encounter. But why, human?' 

'I do not know. You tell me. And if you do not find it appropriate, then I'll go. But I'd 
prefer another way out, because your companions are waiting with the desire to break my 
ribs.' 

'All right,' the elf reached out with a rapid motion of his outstretched hand and the rock 
wall flung open with a creak and a crack appeared running down the centre of the violet 
buffalo. 'Go this way. Walk towards the light. Figuratively or literally, it is usually the right 
way.' 

'It's a pity,' said Geralt. 'About your picture.' 

'Are you kidding?' the elf asked in disbelief, but surprisingly kind and friendly. 'Nothing 
will happen to the picture. With an identical spell I will close the rock and there will be no 
traces of a crack. Come on. I'll go with you, I will guide you. I've concluded that I do have 
something to tell you. And to show you.' 

On the other side of the wall was darkness. The witcher immediately knew that the cavern 
was immense – from the temperature and air movement. They walked on wet pebbles. 

Avallac'h conjured a light – the Elvish way, with only a gesture and without uttering a 
spell. The glowing ball flew towards the ceiling, the crystal formations in the walls of the 
cave were lit with a myriad of reflections and shadows danced. The witcher sighed 
involuntary. 

This was not the first time that he had seen Elvish sculptures and relief, but every time, 
the feeling was the same. The figures of elves frozen in full motion in a blink of an eye, was 
not the product of chisel and sculptor but a powerful wizard's spell that could transform 
living tissue into white marble from the Amell Mountains. 


The closest sculpture featured a young elf sitting crossed-legged on a basaltic plate. The 
elf was straining her neck and had her head turned as if she their footsteps. She was 
completely naked. The milk-gloss of the polished marble gave the feeling that her beautiful 
body was warm and radiated heat. 

Avallac'h stopped and leaned on one of the columns that defined the path between the 
sculptures. 

'For the second time,' he said quietly, 'you have found me out, Geralt. You were right, 
the buffalo is painted on the wall as camouflage, which is there to prevent people digging 
through the rock and protecting all that is hidden behind it. It was supposed to prevent the 
devastation and theft. All races, the elves too, are entitled to their roots. What you see here 
are our roots. Tread carefully please. This is actually a cemetery.' 

The light dancing from the mountain crystals revealed more and more details – statues, 
reliefs, monuments, columns and arcades. Everything in white marble. 

'I want it to survive,' Avallac'h made a broad gesture. 'Even when we leave and the 
entire land is covered by a mile high layer of ice and snow, Tir na Bea Arainne will endure. 
We will leave here, but someday we will return here. We, the elves. It is promised in the Aen 
Ithlinnespeath, in Ithlinne Aegli aep Aevenien's prophecy.' 

'You really believe in her? In her prophecy? Does you fatalism run so deep?' 

'Everything was foretold,' the elf did not look at him, but at a marble column covered in a 
delicate gossamer relief, 'Your arrival, war, the shedding of human and elven blood. The rise 
of your race, the decline of ours. The struggle between the rulers of the North and the South. 
The Ruler of the South will rise against the kings of the North and his troops will fill their 
countries like a flood and the nations will be destroyed. So begins the destruction of the 
world. Do you remember the Aen Ithlinnespeath, witcher? Whoever is far away, will die 
from the plague – whoever is near, will die by the sword, whoever forbids, will die of 
hunger, whoever survives, will be lost in the cold... Because Tedd Deireadh comes – The 
End of Time, The Time of the Sword and Axe, The Time of Contempt, The Time of White 
Chill and the White Light, The Time of the Wolf's Blizzard...' 

'Poetry.' 

'Would you prefer to hear it less poetic? As a result of the changes to the angle of the sun, 
the earth will shift the boundaries of eternal ice far to the south. Even these mountains will be 
overwhelmed by a continental glacier. Everything will be covered in snow. And winter will 
reign.' 

'We'll wear warm pants,' Geralt without emotion, 'fur coats and hats over our ears.' 

'You took the word right out of my mouth,' said the elf. 'And those in these pants and 
hats will survive and would one day return here, to dig holes and rummage in the cave to 
plunder and steal. The prophecy of Ithlinne does not mention it, but I know it. You cannot 


exterminate cockroaches and humans will always have at least one prolific pair. As for us, the 
elves, the prophecy speaks clearly, those who follow the Swallow will survive. The Swallow 
is a symbol of spring, it is the saviour, the one that opens the forbidden door, to show us the 
way to our salvation. It will allow the rebirth of the world. The Swallow, the Child of the 
Elder Blood.' 

'That means Ciri,' Geralt could not resist. 'Or her child? How? And why?' 

It seemed that Avallac'h had not heard. 

'The Swallow of the Elder Blood,' he repeated thoughtfully. 'From her blood. Behold.' 

Even among the perfect lifelike statues there was a distinguished monument to which 
Avallac'h now gestured. A white marble elf, half-lying on a platform, giving the impression 
of having just awakened and was ready to get up at any moment. The face was turned to the 
empty seat beside her and an outstretched hand touched something invisible there. In her face 
showed an expression of peace and happiness. 

It was a long time before Avallac'h broke the silence. 

'This is Lara aep Shiadhal. Obviously it is not her tomb, but a cenotaph. Does the position 
of the statue surprise you? Finally, the project to carve in marble the two legendary lovers did 
not get much support. Lara and Cregennan of Lod. Cregennan was a human, and it would 
have been a desecration to waste Amell marble on a statue of him. It would be a blasphemy 
to place here a statue of a human being, in Tir ne Bea Arainne. On the other hand it would be 
a greater crime to destroy the memory of that feeling. So they took the middle course. 
Cregennan... is not formally here. And yet he is. In the look and the gesture of Lara. The 
lovers are together. Even death cannot separate them. Neither death nor oblivion... Or hatred.' 

It seemed to the witcher that the elf's indifferent voice had changed for a moment. But it 
was unlikely that this was possible. Avallac'h approached the statue, with care and with a 
delicate movement stroked the marble arm. Then her turned and his triangular face showed 
its trademark mocking smile. 

'Do you know, witcher, what the biggest drawback of longevity is?' 

'No.' 

'Sex.' 

'What?' 

'You heard right, sex. After less than one hundred years it eventually becomes boring. 
There is nothing in it that excites or fascinates, which would have the beauty of novelty. 
Everything has been done... One way, or another. And then suddenly comes the Conjunction 
of the Spheres and the appearance of humans. The remnants of humanity fleeing from 
another world, your own world that you totally destroyed, with your own hands that were still 
covered in hair, just five million years after you formed as a species. You were only a 


handful, but your average life span is ridiculously short, so your continued existence depends 
on the speed in which you can multiply, so the desire, the lust for it will never abandon you, 
sex rules you completely, it is a stronger pull then even your survival instinct. Dying? Why 
not, provided that before you do, you fuck. That, in short, is your entire philosophy.' 

Geralt did not interrupt or say anything, but he really wanted to do so. 

'And then what happens?' continued Avallac'h. 'The elves, bored with their boring elven 
women, start to prefer willing human women, and the bored female elf indulged in the 
perverse curiosity, of the human male who is always full of vigour and strength. And then 
something happened that no one expected and no one could explain – elves normally only 
ovulate once every ten to twenty years, but from mating with humans, they began to ovulate 
with every intense orgasm. It worked with some kind of hidden hormone or combination of 
hormones. The elves understood that with this practice they could have children with 
humans. And we could work towards exterminating you while we were still stronger. Later 
you became stronger and you began to exterminate us. But you still had allies among the 
elves. They were the party of convenience, cooperation and coexistence... and they did not 
want to recognise the reality that they we lying in bed with you.' 

'And what does all this have to do with me?' growled Geralt. 

'You? Absolutely nothing. But it has a lot to do with Ciri. Ciri is a descendant of Lara 
Dorren aep Shiadhal, and Lara Dorren favoured coexistence with humans. Mainly one 
human. With the human wizard, Cregennan of Lod. Lara Dorren coexisted with the 
aforementioned Cregennan frequently and successfully. Simply put – she became pregnant.' 

The witcher remained silent this time. 

'The problem lay in that Lara Dorren was no ordinary elf. She had an extraordinary 
genetic makeup, the result of generations of effort. With the combination with other genes, of 
course, elven, she should have given birth to a unique child. Conceiving with the seed of a 
human buried that chance; she threw away the result of hundreds of years of planning and 
preparation. Well at least we thought so. No one suspected that a mongrel born of Cregennan 
could inherit something positive from their mother. No, a marriage so unequal could not 
bring anything good...' 

'And so,' interrupted Geralt, 'were severely punished.' 

'Not the way you think,' Avallac'h said quickly. 'Although the relationship between Lara 
Dorren and Cregennan brought incalculable damage to the elves, it was humans, not elves 
who murdered Cregennan. It was humans, not elves that led to the downfall of Lara. So it 
was, although many elves had reason to hate the lovers. They also had personal reasons.' 

For the second time, Geralt was surprised by the slight change in the tone of voice of the 
elf. 


'Anyways,' continued Avallac'h, 'the dream of coexistence burst like a soap bubble, and 
between the races was sparked a bloody war, a war that continues to this day. Meanwhile, 
the genetic material of Lara... As you probably already guessed, over the years did not die 
but rather evolved. Unfortunately, it has mutated. Yes, yes. Your Ciri is a mutant.' 

This time the elf did not wait for him to say something. 

'Of course the sorcerers poked their noses in. Deliberately combining selected people in 
pairs, but eventually it got out of their control. Few could guess, how the genetic material 
could be reborn so powerfully in Ciri and what was the trigger. I think Vilgefortz knows, the 
same man who broke your bones at Thanedd. The sorcerers who were experimenting with the 
descendants of Lara and Riannon, did not get their desired results and abandoned the 
experiment. But the experiment continued, only now spontaneously. Ciri, Pavetta's daughter, 
granddaughter of Calanthe and descendant of Riannon, a direct descendant of Lara Dorren. 
Vilgefortz probably learned this by chance. Emhyr var Emreis, Emperor of Nilfgaard is 
aware of this too.' 

'And you know this too.' 

'I actually know more than both of them. But this does not matter. The mill of 
predestination works, grinding the grain of fate... You cannot change what is to happen.' 

'And what is that?' 

'What was prophesied. What was decided ages ago, of course, figuratively. Finally, 
something that was determined by the action of an infallible mechanism at whose base lies 
the Objective, the Plan and the Outcome.' 

'This is either poetry or metaphysics. Or both, because sometimes it is difficult to 
distinguish. Is it possible that you can talk in specifics? Even if it is minimal? Well I'd gladly 
discuss this with you further, but it turns out that I'm in a hurry.' 

Avallac'h measured him with a penetrating look. 

'And why the hurry? Oh, sorry... You, it seems, have not understood anything I said. So I 
will tell you directly – your great venture of rescue is meaningless. It is useless. First, it is too 
late – the principal evil has already taken place, you are long longer able to rescue the girl 
before he gets her. Second, now she has entered the true path, The Swallow can fend for 
herself brilliantly, she has the power within herself to make everything fear her. So your help 
is unnecessary. And third... Hmmm...' 

'I'm listening, Avallac'h. I've been listening the entire time.' 

'Third... Third, someone else will help her now. I hope you are not so arrogant to think 
that this girl is only associated with your destiny.' 

'Is that all?' 


'Yes.' 

'Goodbye then.' 

'Wait a minute.' 

'I told you. I'm in a hurry.' 

'Try to imagine for a moment,' said the elf, 'that I really know what will happen, that I 
see the future. If I tell you what will happen, regardless of your efforts. Of your initiatives. If 
I tell you, could you find a quiet place on the earth and sit there, doing nothing, waiting for 
the fulfilment of the inevitable consequences from the chain of circumstances, would you 
choose to do that?' 

'No.' 

'What if I told you that your actions could, although the likelihood is slim, really make a 
difference, but only for the worse? Would you change your mind? Ah, I see from your face 
that you would not. So I ask you – why not?' 

'Do you really want to know?' 

'Really.' 

'Because I simply do not believe in your metaphysical platitudes about objectives, plans 
and from above counsel creators. I also do not believe in your famous prophetess Ithlinne or 
her prophecies. I consider her an imagination the same bullshit and humbug as your 
paintings. A purple buffalo, Avallac'h. Nothing more. I do not know if you cannot or do not 
want to help. However, I do not hold grudges...' 

'You say that I cannot or do not want to help. How could I help you?' 

Geralt thought for a moment, absolutely aware that the proper formulation of the 
questions mattered a lot. 

'Do I save Ciri?' 

The answer came immediately. 

'You will save her. Only to immediately lose her. And this time it is forever. Before that 
happens, you will lose all of those who accompany you. One of your companions you will 
lose in the next few weeks, maybe even days. Perhaps even hours.' 

'Thank you.' 

'I'm not finished. As a direct and imminent result of your interference with the grinding 
millstone the Objective and the Plan will be the death of tens of thousands of people. Which, 
however, will not matter much, because shortly after tens of millions of people will die. The 
world as you know it will disappear, cease to exist and after a period of time will be reborn in 
a completely changed form. But this will happen and no one will have any effect, no one will 


be able to prevent or reverse the order of things. Neither you nor I, nor the sorcerers, nor the 
Knowing. Not even Ciri. What do you say?' 

'Purple buffalo. Nevertheless, thank you, Avallac'h' 

'In a way,' the elf shrugged, 'I am interest to see what a small stone can do if it falls 
between the mill stone... Is there anything else I can do for you?' 

'I think not. Because I guess you can't show me where Ciri is, right?' 

'Who said that?' 

Geralt held his breath. Avallac'h walked briskly to the cave wall and motioned the 
witcher to follow him. 

'The walls of Tir na Bea Arainne,' he said pointing to the glowing crystal, 'have unusual 
properties. And I have, with all due modesty, extraordinary abilities. Place your hand here. 
Concentrate. Think hard. About how much she needs you right now. Think about how you 
want to save her. The image should appear to you. And be clear. Look, but refrain from 
violent reactions. Do not say anything. This is a vision and you cannot communicate.' 

He obeyed. 

Despite the elf's claim, the vision was not clear. The images were vague, but intense and 
violent and he was taken aback. Severed hands on a table... A window membrane erupting 
with blood... Skeletons riding skeletal horses... Yennefer, bound in chains... A tower. A Black 
Tower. And behind it... The Northern Lights? 

Suddenly without warning, the picture became clear and sharp. Too sharp. 

'Dandelion,' shouted Geralt. 'Milva! Angouleme!' 

'What?' Avallac'h became interested. 'Ah, yes. It seems to me that you've destroyed 
everything.' 

Geralt jumped back from the wall of the cave, nearly falling on the basalt floor. 

'It doesn't matter, dammit!' he said. 'Listen, Avallac'h, I have to quickly get to the Druid 
forest.' 

'Caed Myrkvid?' 

'Yes! My friends are in mortal danger there! They are fighting for their lives! They are 
threatened by other people! As quickly as possible... the devil! I'm going back for my horse 
and sword...' 

'No horse,' interrupted the elf calmly, 'will be able to take you to Myrkvid Grove before 
nightfall...' 

'But I...' 


'I'm not finished. Go after your famous sword, while I handle your horse. A perfect 
mount for the mountain paths. This horse is a little, I would say, atypical... But thanks to him 
you will be in Caed Myrkvid with a half an hour.' 

 

*** 

 

The knocker smelled like a horse, and there any resemblance ended. Geralt had once seen 
in Mahakam a contest organised by the dwarves where they rode wild sheep down a 
mountain and it had seemed to him to be the absolutely extreme sport. But now, sitting on the 
back of the knocker that ran like a madman, he knew what a truly extreme sport was. 

To avoid falling off, he convulsively dig his fingers into the rough mattered hair and 
squeezed his thighs into the hairy sides of the monster. The knocker reeked of sweat, urine 
and vodka. It ran as if possessed, the earth shook under the blows from his huge feet, as if he 
had soles of bronze. Barely reducing his speed, he slid down a slope and ran so fast that the 
air howled threw their ears. Flying over ridges, some paths and ledges seemed so narrow that 
Geralt clenched shut his eyelids and did not look down. He crossed waterfalls, cascades, pits 
and cracks which mountain goats would not dare to jump, and each jump was accompanied 
by a deafening roar. That is, even more wild and deafening that usual, since the knocker 
raged almost without pause. 

'Slow down a little!' the wind pushed the witcher's words back down his throat. 

'Why?' 

'Because you've been drinking!' 

'UUuuuuaaaahaaaaah!' 

He jumped. The wind whistled in their ears. 

The knocker stunk. 

The pounding of huge feet on the rocks decreased, and rocks and scree rattled less. The 
ground became less rocky, something green swiftly passed by that could have been a dwarf 
pine. It was replaced by a green and brown fir forest. The smell of resin mingled with the 
stench of the monster. 

'Uaaaahaaaaa!' 

The green needles were left behind. Now they were surrounded by different colours – 
yellow, ochre, orange and red. Under the knocker's feet leaves rustled. 

'Slow down!' 

'Uaaaahaaa!' 


The knocker went through a long jump of a fallen tree. Geralt almost bit off his tongue. 

 

*** 

 

The wild ride ended as abruptly as it had begun. 

The knocker dug his heels into the ground, roared and slammed the witcher into the 
ground. Geralt while lying on the fallen leaves, gasping for breath, could not even curse. 
Then he got up, hissing and massaging his knee, which was in pain again. 

'You didn't fall off,' said the knocker, his voice filled with amazement. 'Well, well' 

Geralt said nothing. 

'Here we are,' the knocker pointed with his hairy foot. 'This is Caed Myrkvid.' 

Below them lay a valley filled with fog. Above the fog stood the tips of trees. 

'This fog,' the knocker anticipated his question, 'isn't natural. Apart from that, you can 
smell the smoke from here. If I was you, I'd hurry. Eeech, I would go with you... I feel the 
desire for a proper fight. That would be a fine parade, running to the attack with a witcher on 
my back! But Avallac'h forbade me to show myself. For the safety of our entire 
community...' 

'I know.' 

'Do not resent me because I hit you in the jaw.' 

'I don't' 

'You're a real man.' 

'Thank you. Also for those words.' 

The knocker showed his teeth from under his red beard and exhaled the smell of vodka. 

'The pleasure has been mine.' 

 

*** 

 

The fog that flooded the forest of Myrkvid was dense and had an irregular shape, 
reminiscent of a pile of whipped cream planted on a cake by an insane cook. The fog 
reminded the witcher of Brokilon. The forest of the Dryads was often covered by a magical 


mist for protection and camouflage. And similar to Brokilon was the solemn atmosphere of 
the threatening forest, there on the edges, which mostly consisted of alder and beech. 

And in the same way as in Brokilon, on the edge of the forest, on a path covered with 
leaves, Geralt almost tripped over a bunch of corpses. 

 

*** 

 

The horribly mangled bodies were not Druids or Nilfgaardians, and they certainly didn't 
belong to Nightingale or Schirru. Before Geralt entered the fog he recalled that Regis had 
spoken of some pilgrims. It seems for the pilgrims the journey had not ended well for 
someone of them. 

The smell of acrid smoke and burning in the humid air was getting stronger, so he was 
heading in the right direction. He soon heard voices, screams and the creaking of a violin. 

Geralt quickened his pace. 

On the path flooded by the rain was a cart. Lying next to its wheels were more dead 
bodies. 

One of the bandits rummaging in the cart was throwing items and tools onto the path. The 
second held the horses; a third was tearing from a dead pilgrim a fox-trimmed cape and a 
forth was sawing at a fiddle with a bow which he must have found among the loot. For 
nothing in the world seemed able to make him produce a clear note. 

The cacophony came in handy. Hiding the sound of Geralt's footsteps. 

The music stopped abruptly, the strings of the violin gave a wrenching moan, the bandit 
fell onto the leaves watering them with blood. The one who held the horses even managed to 
scream before Sihil cut his jugular. The third thief did not managed to jump out of the cart 
but fell, roaring, with a slit femoral artery. The last even had time to draw his sword from its 
sheath. But not enough to lift it. 

Geralt used his thumb to wipe the blood off of his sword. 

'Well boys,' he said towards the forest, in the direction of the smoke. 'That was a stupid 
idea. You should have listened to Nightingale and Schirru. You should have stayed at home.' 

 

*** 

 


Soon he ran into another cart and more dead. Among the many pilgrims lay slashed and 
chopped Druids in white robes. Smoke from the nearby fire now lay close to the ground. 

 This time the thieves were more alert. He only managed to get close without being 
noticed by one, who was busy collecting rings and bracelets from the arm of a dead woman. 
Geralt, without thinking, slashed at the bandit, the bandit screamed and the other bandits, 
intermingled with Nilfgaardians, rushed at him with shouts. 

He retreated back into the forest, using a nearby tree trunk to protect his back. But before 
the bandits could reach him there came the sound of horse's hooves and from the fog 
emerged a giant horse covered in gold and red barding in a diagonal checkerboard pattern. 
The horse carried a rider in full armour, with a snow white cloak and a helmet with a visor 
that stretched to a point. Before the bandits managed to recover, the knight was already 
among them, chopping at their necks with his sword, left and right and the blood flowed like 
a fountain. It was a beautiful sight. 

Geralt did not have time to stand idly by, for two enemies threw themselves at him, one 
bandit had a cheery coloured doublet and the other was dress in black Nilfgaardian clothing. 
The bandit he sliced across the face. The Nilfgaardian, seeing teeth flying, turned on his heels 
and disappeared into the fog. 

Geralt was almost trampled by the horse with the chequered trappings. Which galloped by 
without a rider. 

Without hesitation, he sprang through the underbrush toward the place where he could 
hear shouting, cursing and blows. 

Three bandits had managed to pull the knight from his saddle and were now trying to beat 
him. One of them stood astride the knight and beat him with an axe, the other was slashing 
with a sword. The third, a man with red hair, was jumping around like a rabbit and waited for 
an opportunity to be able to stick his triangular spear tip in between the armour plates. The 
fallen knight shouted something unintelligible from inside his helmet and reflect the blows 
with a shield which he held in both hands. After each blow from the axe, the shield was 
getting lower, almost pressing against his chest. It was clear that one or two more blows and 
the guts of the knight would flow through the cracks in the armour. 

In three leaps, Geralt was in the middle of vortex, slashing the neck of the jumping 
redhead with the spear and opening the belly of the one with the axe. The knight, agile 
despite the armour, punched the third bandit in the knee with the edge of his shield and 
pummelled him when he fell three times in the face until blood splattered the shield. He knelt 
and searched among the reeds for his sword, like a huge horsefly made of metal. Suddenly he 
saw Geralt and froze. 

'In whose hands am I?' a voice sounded from the depths of the helmet. 

'In the hands no one. Those that lie here were my enemies.' 


'Oh...' The knight tried to lift the visor, but the metal was warped and the hinges were 
stuck. 'On my honour! A thousand thanks for your help.' 

'For my help? After all, it was you who came to my rescue.' 

'Indeed? When?' 

He didn't see anything, thought Geralt. He did not even notice me through the holes in 
his helmet. 

'What is your name?' asked the knight. 

'Geralt. Of Rivia.' 

'Coat of Arms?' 

'This is no time, sir knight, for heraldry.' 

'On my honour, you speak the truth, brave knight Geralt.' 

The knight found his sword and stood. His jagged blade, like the horse's barding, was 
adorned with the red gold diagonal checkerboard pattern, and each square alternately bore the 
letters A and H. 

'This is not my ancestral coat of arms,' boomed the knight in explanation. 'These are the 
initials of my lady, Duchess Anna Henrietta. I am called Knight of Chess. I am a knight-
errant. I am not allowed to reveal my real name or coat of arms. I have made a vow of 
chivalry. On my honour, thank you once again, sir.' 

'It's my pleasure.' 

One of the fallen bandits moaned and rustled in the leaves. The Knight of Chess 
approached and stabbed him with a powerful thrust to the ground. The bandit waved his arms 
and legs like a spider stuck under a pin. 

'Hurry,' said the knight. 'Bandits still roam around here. On my honour, it is not time to 
rest!' 

'True,' admitted Geralt. 'Bandits wander through the forest, killing pilgrims and Druids. 
My friends are in danger...' 

'Excuse me a moment.' 

Another bandit was showing signs of life and the knight pinned him to the ground. He 
kicked his legs so hard that his boots fell off. 

'On my honour.' The Knight of Chess said, wiping his sword on the grass. 'These bandits 
are hard to part with life! Do not be surprised, sir Geralt, that I give them an end to life. On 
my honour, before I would not. But these bandits recover health so quickly, that an honest 


man can only envy. Since I've had to measure myself against these rogues three times, I've 
started to finish them off carefully. So they are gone for good.' 

'I understand.' 

'As I said, I'm a knight-errant, but, on my honour, I am not vicious in spirit. Ha, here is 
my horse. Come, Bucephalus!' 

 

*** 

 

The forest became more spacious and clear, it began to be dominated by great oaks with 
spreading, but rare crowns. The smoke and stench of the fire already felt close. After a while 
they saw it. 

Reed roofed huts burned in a small village. Cloth was burning on wagons. Among the 
wagons, lay the dead – many were visible from a distant and wore the white robes of Druids. 

Bandits and Nilfgaardians, taking cover behind wagons which they pushed before them, 
attached a large house that stood on stilts. The house was built of solid wood beams and 
covered with wood shingles arranged in a slope, which torches thrown by the bandits 
harmlessly slid down. The house was under siege and was successfully being defended – in 
front of Geralt one of the robbers inadvertently leaned out from behind the wagon and fell 
like a thunderbolt, struck with an arrow in the skull/ 

'Your friends,' said the Knight of Chess, 'must be in that building! On my honour, they 
are in considerable difficulty. Come on, to their rescue!' 

Geralt heard a loud shout and some orders, her recognised the bandit Nightingale with a 
bandaged face. He saw for a moment the half-elf Schirru covering the black Nilfgaardians 
from behind. 

Suddenly horns blared until leaves began to fall from the oaks. The sound of battle horses 
hooves drummed, armour shone and swords flashed of charging knights. With a roar, the 
bandits ran in different directions. 

'On my honour!' growled the Knight of Chess, spurring his horse. 'They are my 
comrades! They have overtaken us! To the attack, let is also gain glory! Slay, kill!' 

Galloping on Bucephalus, the Knight of Chess came upon the scurrying bandits. He killed 
two of them and the others scattered before him like sparrows before a hawk. Two turned in 
Geralt's direction. The witcher took care of them in a blink of an eye. 

A third shot at him with a Gabriel. A miniature crossbow invented and built by Gabriel, a 
craftsman in Verden. He pioneered the slogan, 'Protect yourself from banditry and violence', 
said the advertisement. 'The law is helpless and powerless. Protect yourself! Do not leave 


home without a handy Gabriel brand crossbow. Gabriel is your guardian angel, Gabriel will 
protect you and your loved ones from bandits,' 

The demand had surpassed all expectations and the sale had achieved a true record. Soon 
all bandits wore a Gabriel when assaulting someone. 

Geralt was a witcher and was able to dodge the arrow. However he had forgotten about 
the pain in his knee. The dodge was delayed by an inch and the blade-shaped tip tore his ear. 
The pain blinded him, but only for a moment. The bandit did not have time to tighten the 
crossbow and defend himself. Geralt, full of rage, cut of his hands and then spilled his guts 
with Sihil. 

He had no time to even wipe the blood from his ear and neck when he was attacked by a 
small bandit with eyes like a weasel, eyes that shone unnaturally, armed with a curved 
Zerrikanian sabre, which he spun with skill worth of admiration. Geralt had already stopped 
two slashes and from the two blades poured sparks. 

Weasel was quick and observant. When he saw that the witcher was limping, he began to 
circle him and attack from the side that was most beneficial. He was incredibly fast, the sharp 
blade of the sabre howled in attack. Geralt avoided the blows with increasing difficulty. 
Every time he limped, his injured leg had to bear his weight. 

Weasel crouched, then suddenly jumped up, made a clever feint followed by lighting 
slashes and lunges. Geralt was able to repulse him. The agile bandit moved into a position to 
launch a dangerous low cut, when suddenly his eyes shut, he sneezed loudly and mucus ran 
from his nose, at the time dropping his guard. The witcher quickly slashed him in the neck, 
the blade going all the way to his spine. 

'Whatever anyone says,' he said looking at the expiring bandit, 'that drugs use is 
extremely dangerous.' 

A bandit who was coming at him with a club raise over his head, tripped and fell with his 
nose into the mud, an arrow protruding from his groin. 

'I'm coming, witcher!' Milva cried. 'I'm coming! Hold on!' 

Geralt turned around, but there was no one to fight. Milva shot the last remaining bandit 
in the area. The rest had fled into the woods, chased by the colourful knights. A number of 
them were being pursued by the Knight of Chess. He disappeared among the trees but they 
could still hear the roars of his belligerent. 

One of the Nilfgaardians, not quite dead, rose suddenly and rushed to escape. Milva 
quickly rose and drew her bow. The arrow whistled, hitting the fleeing man between the 
shoulder blades. 

The archer sighed. 

'We will be hanged,' she said. 


'Why do you think that?' 

'This is Nilfgaard. And for the last two months, we have killed mostly Nilfgaardians.' 

'This is Toussaint, not Nilfgaard.' Geralt felt the side of his head and took his hand away 
covered in blood. 'Fuck. What has happened there? Look, Milva.' 

The archer looked at the damage with a critical eye. 

'Nothing to worry about,' she said slyly. 'They just shot off your ear.' 

'That's easy for you to say. I really like this ear. Give me a bandage, blood is flowing 
down my collar. Where is Dandelion and Angouleme?' 

'In the cabin with the pilgrims... Oh, shit.' 

From the fog emerged three riders on war steeds, their coats and banners fluttering in the 
wind. Geralt was expecting their battle cry. But Milva grabbed him and dragged him under a 
wagon. There was no joking with someone who rode up armed with a length of spear 
fourteen feet long, giving them an effective range of ten feet in front of their horse's head. 

'Out' the horses of the knights kicked the ground around the wagon. 'Throw down your 
weapons and come out!' 

'We will be hanged,' Milva muttered. 

She could be right. 

'Ha, scoundrels!' thundered the knight with a black bull's head on his silver shield 'On 
my honour, you will hang!' 

'On my honour!' supported the youthful voice of another, with a blue coat. 'Right here 
we are going to tear you apart!' 

'Hey! Stop!' 

Out of the fog came the Knight of Chess. He was finally able to lift the visor on his 
twisted helmet, from underneath it came a now abundant mass of whiskers. 

'Release them immediately,' he called. 'They are not bandits, but honest people. She 
fearlessly defend the pilgrims like a man. And her partner is a good knight, I vouch for him.' 

'A good knight?' Bull's head lifted the visor on his helmet, and look at Geralt 
incredulously. 'On my honour! This cannot be' 

'On my honour!' the Knight of Chess hit his armoured fist onto his breastplate. 'It is true. 
This valiant knight helped me when I was in trouble, when I was outnumbered by those 
scoundrels who threw me to the ground. He is called, Geralt of Rivia.' 

'Coat of Arms?' 


'I must not disclose,' growled the witcher, 'my real name, nor coat of arms. I made a vow 
of chivalry. Now I am errant Geralt.' 

'Ooo!' suddenly shouted a familiar cheeky voice. 'Look what the cat dragged in! Ha, I 
told you, auntie that the witcher would come to our rescue!' 

'And just in time!' Dandelion shouted, coming up together with Angouleme and a small 
group of pilgrims, a lute in one hand and his trusty pipe in the other. 'And not a second too 
soon. You have a sense of drama, Geralt. You ought to write works for the theatre!' 

He stopped suddenly. Bull's head leaned forward in his saddle, his eyes flashing. 

'Viscount Julian?' 

'Baron de Peyrac-Peyran?' 

Two more knights emerged from the oaks. The first, with a helmet adorned with a swans 
white wings, led two prisoners tied by a rope. The second knight-errant, a practical man, had 
prepared a noose and went to look for good branches. 

'Neither of them Nightingale,' Angouleme pointed out to the witcher, 'or Schirru. It's a 
pity.' 

'A pity,' admitted Geralt, 'but I will try to fix it. Sir Knight...' 

But Bull's head – or rather Baron de Peyrac-Peyran, was not paying any attention to him. 
He saw, it seemed, only Dandelion. 

'On my honour,' he drawled. 'Do my eyes deceive me? This is Viscount Julian himself. 
Ha! The duchess will be delighted.' 

'Who is this Viscount Julian?' asked the witcher, intrigued. 

'I am,' Dandelion said under his breath. 'Do not meddle in this, Geralt.' 

'On my honour, duchess Anarietta will be delighted,' repeated the baron. 'We will take 
all of you to her castle Beauclair. And no excuses, Viscount, I will hear no excuses!' 

'A few of the deserters have fled,' Geralt said in a cold tone. 'I propose we capture them 
first. Then think about what to do with a day that began so interesting. What do you say Lord 
Baron?' 

'On my honour, nothing will come of it,' Bull's head said with regret. 'Pursuit is 
impossible. The criminals have fled across the river, and we will not plant even the tip of a 
horse's hoof on the other side. That part of the forest Myrkvid is an untouchable sanctuary, 
and in the spirit of the treaties signed with the Druids by our beloved Duchess Anna 
Henrietta...' 

'The bandits have fled there, dammit!' Geralt interrupted angrily. 'They will kill the 
untouchable sanctuary! And you're telling me that we cannot defend it...' 


'We gave our word of honour!' said Baron Peyrac-Peyran, as it turned out, was more 
worthy of carrying a ram's head instead of a bull. 'It is not allowed! The treaties! Not a foot 
on the ground of the Druids!' 

'It is them who are not allowed, not permitted,' snorted Angouleme, taking the reins of 
two of the bandits horses. 'Leave this empty chatter, witcher. Come on. I still have some 
outstanding accounts with Nightingale, and you, so I guess, would still like to have a chat 
with a certain half-elf.' 

'I'm going with you,' said Milva. 'As soon as I find myself a horse.' 

'Me too,' blurted Dandelion. 'I, too, am with you...' 

'Oh, not you won't!' cried the baron. 'On my honour, Viscount, you will ride with us to 
Beauclair. The duchess would not forgive us if we let you go without bring you to her. I am 
not going to stop the rest of you, you have complete freedom in your intensions and plans. As 
companions of Viscount Julian, he worship Duchess Anarietta would receive you with 
honours at the castle, but if you scorn the hospitality...' 

'We do not scorn,' Geralt interrupted him, throwing Angouleme a threatening look, who 
performed behind the Baron, different disgusting and offensive gestures. 'We are not 
scorning. We will certainly go to the duchess and offer her the tribute she deserves. But first 
we must take care of what we have to do. We have also given our word. As soon as we finish, 
we will promptly make our way to Beauclair Castle. We will go there without fail.' 

'If only,' he added significantly and emphatically, 'to ensure that no discredit or 
dishonour is caused by our friend Dandelion. That is to say, Julian.' 

'On my honour!' the baron smiled suddenly. 'No dishonour or discredit will be caused by 
Viscount Julian, I give my word. I forgot to tell you, Viscount, Count Rajmund died of 
apoplexy two years ago.' 

'Ha, ha!' Dandelion shouted, his face suddenly radiant. 'So the count died of apoplexy? 
What happy and joyful news... That is, I meant sad and sorrowful... Let him rest in peace... 
However, if this is so, let us go to Beauclair swiftly, gentlemen! Geralt, Milva, Angouleme, 
we will be at the castle!' 

 

*** 

 

The forded the river, spurring their horses into the woods, among the spreading oaks, the 
ferns reached up to their stirrups. Milva effortlessly found the trail of the band of fugitives. 
They travelled as fast as possible – Geralt feared for the Druids. He feared that the remnants 
of the bandits, feeling safe, would take their revenge on the knights of Toussaint by 
massacring the Druids. 


'What do you have to say about Dandelion?' Angouleme said. 'When Nightingale had us 
surrounded in the cabin he told me why he was afraid of Toussaint.' 

'I had imagined,' said the witcher. 'I just didn't know he had aimed so high. A duchess, 
ha, ha!' 

'It was quite a few years ago. Count Rajmund, the one who kicked the bucket, apparently 
swore that he would rip out the heart of the poet, cook it and send it to the Duchess and make 
her eat it. Dandelion was lucky not to have fallen into the clutches of the Count while he was 
still alive. And we are lucky...' 

'That remains to be seen.' 

'Dandelion says the Duchess Anarietta loves him to madness.' 

'Dandelion always says that.' 

'Close your mouths!' Milva barked, pulling on her reins and reaching for her bow. 

Dodging from oak to oak, speeding towards them was a bandit, he had no hat, no 
weapons and he ran blindly. He ran, tripped over, got up and ran again. He screamed. A 
shriek that was piercing and horrible. 

'What is it?' Angouleme, was amazed. 

Milva tightened the bow in silence. But did not shoot, she waited until the bandit the 
villain was head right towards them, as if he could not see them. He crossed at full speed 
between the witcher's horse and Angouleme's. 

They saw his face, white as a sheet and distorted by fear, eyes bulging. 

'What the hell?' repeated Angouleme. 

Milva shook herself out of her stupor, turned in her saddle and launched an arrow into his 
back. The bandit screamed and fell into the ferns. 

The earth shook. From a nearby oak, acorns rained. 

'I wonder,' said Angouleme, 'what he was fleeing from...' 

The earth shook again. The bushes snapped and branch broke and creaked. 

'What is that?' Milva wailed, standing in the stirrups. 'What is it, witcher?' 

Geralt stared, saw and took a deep breath. Angouleme saw it too. And paled. 

'Oh, shit!' 

Milva's horse saw it too. It whinnied in panic, going on two legs and kicking. The archer 
flew from the saddle and fell heavily on the ground. The horse ran into the woods. Geralt's 
mount began to gallop back the way they came without prompting, which was bad luck as he 


chose a path under an oak with a low hanging branch. The branch swept the witcher out of 
the saddle. The shock and pain in his knee almost deprived him of consciousness. 

Angouleme managed to stay on her prancing horse the longest, but ultimately, she was 
thrown to the ground. The runaway horse nearly trampled Milva as she tried to rise. 

At that moment they saw clearly what approached them and they ceased to be amazed by 
the panic of the animals. 

The creature resembled a tree, a gnarled knotted oak. Or maybe it really was an oak. But 
unlike a typical oak, instead of standing there is a field calmly among the fallen leaves and 
acorns, instead of allowing squirrels to race across it branches, the oak was walking briskly 
through the woods, trampling strong roots and breaking branches. The stocky trunk, or torso 
of the monster had to be about two fathoms in diameter and the beak protruding from it was 
perhaps not a beak, but rather a mouth, because it opened and closed with a sound 
reminiscent of heavy doors shutting. 

Although under the terrible weight the earth trembled so that it was difficult to maintain 
balance, the monster crossed a ravine with breathtaking agility. But did not do this without 
purpose. 

Before their eyes the waving branches and twigs snapped towards a fallen tree and pulled 
out the bandit hiding there as deftly as a stork, when hunting frogs in the grass. Wrapped in 
the branches, the bandit remained suspended, screaming until even they pitied him. Geralt 
saw that the monster already had three other bandits hanging the same way. And one 
Nilfgaardian. 

'Run...' he groaned, trying in vain to stand. He felt that someone was hammering his knee 
with white hot nails. '... Milva, Angouleme... Run...' 

'We will not leave you here!' 

The tree creature must have heard, because it happily stamped it roots and hurried 
towards them. Angouleme, when she failed to lift the witcher, cursed vulgarly. Milva with 
shaking hands was trying to put an arrow on the bowstring, as if that could somehow help. 

'Run!' 

I was too late. The tree creature was already upon them. Paralyzed with fear, they could 
now see his booty, four bandits who were hung on the branches. Two were alive, and 
emitting a terrible howling and shaking their legs. The third, perhaps unconscious, hung 
helplessly. The creature, was obviously trying to capture its prey alive. But with the four 
prisoner, this did not work out, perhaps he had inadvertently squeezed to tightly, as they 
could see his eyes popping out, his tongue protruding from his mouth and blood and vomit 
staining his beard. 

In the next instant they hung in the air, surrounded by branches and shouting at the top of 
their lungs. 


'Hush, hush, hush,' they heard from below, from among the roots. 'Be careful, tree.' 

From behind the tree creature, walked a young druid girl dressed in white with a wreath 
of flowers in her hair. 

'Do not hurt, tree, do not squeeze. Gently. Hush, hush, hush.' 

'We are not bandits,' Geralt groaned from above, barely able to speak as the braches were 
tight across his chest. 'Tell it to release us... We are innocent...' 

'Everyone says the same,' the Druidess chased away a butterfly that hovered near her 
eyebrow. 'Hush, hush, hush.' 

'I've pissed myself...' groaned Angouleme. 'Damn it all, I pissed myself!' 

Milva just grunted. Her head dropped to her chest. Geralt cursed outrageously. It was all 
he could do. 

The tree creature, spurred by the Druidess, moved through the forest. During the march, 
all those who were conscious, felt their teeth chattering with footsteps of the tree creature. 
They soon came to a large clearing. Geralt saw a group of white dress Druids here and a 
second tree creature. This one had a poorer catch, in its branches hung only three bandits, 
which out of them only one was alive. 

'Criminals, murderers, unworthy people,' said one of the druids from below, an old man 
leaning on a long stick. 'Take a good look. See what punishment awaits those who enter 
Myrkvid forest as criminals and unworthy. Look and remember it. I let you go so you can tell 
others what you will see in a moment. As a warning.' 

In the centre of the clearing, stood a tall pile of logs and branches. On it, supported by 
stakes, stood a large wicker cage which was in the shape of a wooden doll. The cage was full 
of people screaming and sobbing. The witcher clearly heard the cries of the hoarse, frog voice 
of the bandit Nightingale filled with fear. He could see the pale, terrified face of the half-elf 
Schirru, pressed against the wicker lattice. 

'Druids,' Geralt shouted with as much strength as he could to be heard above the 
imprisoned bandits. 'Lady Flaminica! I am the witcher, Geralt!' 

'Who is calling me?' said a tall, thin woman from below. Steel grey hair fell to her 
shoulders and just above her forehead was a sprig of mistletoe. 

'I am... The witcher, Geralt... Friend of Emiel Regis...' 

'Repeat, I did not hear.' 

'Geraaaaalt! The vampire's friend.' 

'Ah! You should have said so before!' 


At a signal from the steel-haired Druidess the tree creature lowed them to the ground. Not 
very gently. They fell down, none of them able to stand on their own. Milva was 
unconscious, blood running from her nose. Geralt got up with difficulty and knelt over her. 

The steel-haired flaminica stood next to him and cleared her throat. Her face was very 
thing, even emaciated, arousing an unpleasant association with a skull covered with skin. Her 
eye as blue as cornflowers were kind and sweet. 

'I think she has a broken rib,' she said, looking down at Milva. 'But I have a cure. I will 
give it to her to aid in healing. I regret what has happened. But how was I to know who you 
were? No one invited you to come to Caed Myrkvid and you were not given permission to 
enter our sanctuary. Emiel Regis is a testament to you, true, but the presence in our forest of a 
witcher, a murderer paid to kill living...' 

'I'll leave here without a moment's delay, honourable flaminica,' said Geralt. 'If only...' 

He stopped when he saw the burning torches being carried by Druids towards the wicker 
doll full of people. 

'No!' he shouted, clenching his fists. 'Stop!' 

'The cage,' said the flaminica as if she didn't hear, 'was originally used as winter pasture 
for the starving animals and used to stand in the forest full of hag. But when we capture these 
bandits, I remembered the nasty rumours and slander that people used to say about us. Well, I 
thought, you will have your wicker hag. You invented your nightmare, Now I will show it to 
you...' 

'Order them to stop,' whispered the witcher. 'Honourable flaminica... Do not burn... One 
of these bandits has information important to me...' 

The flaminica laid a hand on his chest. Her eyes were kind and sweet. 

'Oh no,' she said dryly. 'Not at all. I do not believe in the institution of the crown witness. 
Providing an offender impunity from punishment is immoral.' 

'Stop!' cried the witcher, 'Do not light the fire! Stop...' 

The flaminica made a brief gesture with her hand and the tree creatures, who were still 
around, stomping their roots, reached down and put a branch on the witcher's shoulder. 
Geralt sat down heavily. 

'Set it on fire!' the flaminica ordered. 'Sorry, witcher, but it is as it should be. We Druids, 
we value and honour life in all its forms. But to leave criminals alive is simple nonsense. 
Criminals are only afraid of fear. So we'll give them a lesson in fear. In the hope that we will 
not have to give a similar lesson, ever again.' 

The brushwood between the crossbar immediately caught flame. The sound from inside 
the wicker hag made his hair stand on end. Of course it was not possible, but Geralt still 


seemed to hear, above the roar and crackle of the fire the sound of the half-elf Schirru 
screaming. 

He was right, he thought, death is not always the same. 

And then, after a desperately long time, the stack exploded and the wicker hag was caught 
in a roaring furnace in which nothing could survive. 

'Your medallion, Geralt,' Angouleme said, standing next to him. 

'What?' he coughed because his throat was tight. 'What did you say?' 

'Your silver wolf medallion. Schirru had it with him. Now you've lost it for good, it 
would have melted in the heat.' 

'I cannot be helped,' he said after a moment, looking into the cornflower eyes of the 
flaminica. 'I'm not a witcher. I ceased to be a witcher. In Thanedd at the Tower of the 
Seagull. In Brokilon. At the bridge over the Yaruga. In the cave in the Gorgon. And here in 
the forest of Myrkvid. No, I'm not a witcher. So I have to learn to live without a Witcher's 
Medallion.' 

 

*** 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


The king loved his wife, the queen, without limit, and she loved him with all her heart. 
Something like that could only end in disaster. 

 

Flourens Delannoy 

Fairytales and Stories 

 

Delannoy, Flourens (1432-1510) – Linguist and historian. Born in Vicovaro, secretary 
and librarian to the imperial court from 1460 to 1475. Tireless researcher into legends and 
folklore, author of numerous important treatises considered to be seminal works of linguistic 
history and literature from the northern regions of the Empire. Among his most important 
works, one could cite: Myths and Legends of the Nordlings, Fairytales and Stories, Surprise 
or Myth of Elder Blood, The Witcher Saga, as well as The Witcher and the Witcheress, or a 
search unending. Beginning in 1476, he officiates as professor at the academy of Castell 
Graupian where he dies in 1520. 

 

Effenberg and Talbot 

Encyclopaedia Maxima Mundi, tome IV 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


