Chapter Eight 

 

 

The wind blew from the sea, the sails flapped. A tiny drizzle of hail pounded painfully 
into his face. The water from the Grand Canal was oily, agitated by the wind and sprinkled 
with rain drops. 

'Please, sir, this way. The ship is waiting.' 

Dijkstra sighed, he was sick of travelling by sea, he was pleased with the few moments 
when he could feel under his feet the stable embankment and stones and the thought of going 
back to the rocking deck made him sick. But what was he going to do. Lan Exeter, the winter 
capital of Kovir, differed significantly from other capitals in the world, In the port of Lan 
Exeter travellers who came by sea landed on the stone of the pier only to embark immediately 
on the next vessel, a slender ship with a high bow and a much lower stern, driven by a 
multitude of oars. Lan Exeter was built on water, on the broad estuary of the River Tango. 
Instead of streets, the city had canals, and all communication from the city was carried out by 
boats. 

He went aboard and was greeted by the Redanian ambassador, who was waiting for him. 
They moved away from the dock, the oars hitting the water in unison, the ship moved, 
picking up speed. The Redanian ambassador remained silent. 

An ambassador, Dijkstra thought instinctively. How many years since Redania had sent 
an ambassador to Kovir? Over one hundred and twenty. And over one hundred and twenty 
years since Kovir and Poviss shared a border with Redania. It was not always so. 

From the beginning of time Redania treated the countries north of the Gulf of Praxeda, as 
their own fiefdom. Poviss and Kovir were, as it was stated in the court of Tretogor, jewels in 
the crown. They were ruled there by Counts who called themselves Trojdenians, who 
descended or claimed to be descended from a common ancestor, Trojden. Trojden was the 
brother of the king of Redania, Radovid I, later known as the Great. Already in his youth, 
Trojden was considered to be slimy and extremely nasty. It was frightening to think what 
would become of him over the years. King Radovid was not an exception in this regard and 
hated his brother like the plague. So he named him Count of Kovir to get rid of him, sending 
him as far away as possible. And there was no further place than Kovir. 

Count Trojden of Kovir was formally a vassal of Redania, but was an atypical vassal that 
did not carry any burden or feudal obligations. It was not even required of him to take the 
ceremonial oath of allegiance, only a promise to do no harm. Some said that Radovid took 
pity on him, knowing that the 'Jewel in the Crown' could not afford tribute or the vassalage. 
Meanwhile others claimed that Radovid simply did not want to see the young Count, and was 
dizzy just thinking that his brother could appear in person at Tretogor with money or military 
aid. What was the truth, no one knew, but either way, it stayed the same. Many years after the 


death of Radovid I, Redania continued to enforce the laws enacted in the days of the great 
King. First, the county of Kovir was a vassal, but does not have to pay or serve. Second, the 
allowance that any succession is entirely at the discretion of the House of Trojden. Third, 
Tretogor does not mix in the affairs of the House of Trojden. Fourth, Members of the House 
of Trojden are not invited to Tretogor for the celebrations of national holidays. Fifth, or any 
other occasion. 

In short, few knew anything about what happened in the North, let alone cared about it. In 
Redania arrived, mainly through Kaedwen, news of the Count of Kovir's conflicts with minor 
lords of the North. Alliances and wars with Hengfors, Malleore, Creyden, Talgar and other 
countries with difficult to remember names. Someone had conquered someone else and had 
absorbed them, someone had come close to someone with a dynastic tie, someone had 
defeated someone and demanded tribute. In short, nobody knew who, whom or why. 

However, news of wars and struggles in the North attracted crowds of thugs, adventures, 
sensation seekers and other restless spirits in search of booty and rich opportunities. These 
came from all over the world, even from as far away as Cintra or Rivia. But mostly they came 
from Redania and Kaedwen. There were even desertions from the Kaedwen cavalry platoons 
that had left for Kovir. Rumour even said that at the head of one of these was the famous 
Aidden, the rebellious and illegitimate daughter of the King of Kaedwen. In Redania it was 
even said that in the court of Ard Carraigh they played with the idea of occupying the 
northern countries and snatching away the Redanian crown. Some have even started yelling 
about the need for armed intervention. 

However, Tretogor announced ostentatiously that they were not interested in the North. 
As recognised by the royal jurists, the law in force was that of reciprocity, the principality of 
Kovir had no obligations to the crown and the crown offered no help to Kovir. Especially 
since Kovir never asked for any help. 

Meanwhile in Kovir and Poviss the wars had left the North stronger and powerful. 
Though there were few who knew it. The clearest sign of the growing power of the North was 
its increasing export activity. For decades it was said that the only wealth of Kovir was sand 
and seawater. The joke ceased to be a joke when with the production of salt factories; Kovir 
practically monopolized the world market for glass and salt. 

But while hundreds of people were drinking from vessels with the sign of Kovir's 
factories and seasoning their soup with salt, Poviss still remained in the consciousness of the 
people a country incredibly distant, inaccessible, harsh and hostile. 

In Redania and Kaedwen, instead of someone saying 'to hell' they said 'to Poviss.' 'If 
you do not like me,' says the master of wayward journeyman, 'there is a clear road to Kovir.' 
'Do not use those Kovir manners here!' chastise a professor shouting at his unruly students. 
'Go to Poviss' cries the son of a farmer who criticizes the ancient plough of his grandfather 
and the fallow system. 

Whoever did not like the ancient order, were told there was a clear road to Kovir. 


Recipients of these messages slowly began to reflect and soon realised that, indeed, the 
way to Kovir and Poviss lacked any obstacles. A second wave of migrants headed north. And 
as before the wave was made up of strange and unsatisfied people who were different and 
wanted other things. This time, however, they were not just adventurers without a homeland 
and a home. 

To the north went scientists who stood behind their theories, even if they were all 
identified as unrealistic and crazy. Engineers and inventors, who believed that despite the 
general view they could construct revolutionary new machinery and equipment. Wizards, 
who considered using magic to construct levees sacrilege. Merchants for whom the prospect 
of increased profits were able to overcome the rigid boundaries, static and short-sighted risks. 
Farmers and ranchers who were convinced that even the poorest soils could be a fruitful field 
and you could always raise a type of animal that will thrive in that climate. 

To the north also went miners and geologists for the severity of the wild mountains and 
hills in Kovir meant a sure sign that if the on the surface was so much poverty then the 
interior must be hidden wealth. For Nature loves balance. 

Beneath the surface was indeed wealth. 

A quarter of a century passed, and Kovir benefited from its mineral resources as much as 
Redania, Aedirn and Kaedwen together. The extraction and processing of iron ore was only 
surpassed my Mahakam. However, even in Mahakam, Kovir imported precious metals to 
produce alloys. In Kovir and Poviss they had a quarter of the global extraction of silver ore, 
nickel, lead, tin and zinc, half of the extraction of copper and native cooper and three-quarters 
of the extraction of manganese ore, chrome, titanium and tungsten, and the same of metals 
which only appeared in pure form, platinum, ferroaurum and dimeritium. 

And more than eighty percent of the world's gold extraction. 

With the gold, Kovir and Poviss bought all that was not growing or breeding in the north. 
And all the Kovir and Poviss did not produce. Not because they could not or did not know 
how. But it was not profitable. The craftsmen of Kovir and Poviss, the sons or grandsons who 
came there with a bundle on their back, now earn four times more than their counterpart in 
Redania or Temeria. 

Kovir traded and wanted to trade with the whole world on an increasing scale. But was 
unable. 

Radovid III was crowned king of Redania. Who, after his great grandfather Radovid the 
Great inherited the name, and the cunning and greed. The king, by his toadies and flatterers 
was called the Bold, and by all the others the Red, realised what no one before him had 
wanted to realise. Why if there is massive commerce in Kovir is Redania not seeing a penny? 
Because Kovir is but an insignificant county, a fiefdom, a small jewel in the crown of 
Redania. It was high time the vassal Kovir started to serve its sovereign! 


Soon came a good opportunity, Redania got into a border conflict with Aedirn, as usual it 
was over the Pontar valley. Radovid III decided to intervene militarily and began to make the 
necessary preparations. He enacted a special tax for the war called the 'Pontar tithe.' All the 
subjects and vassals were to pay this. Everyone. This included Kovir. The redhead rubbed his 
hands together. Ten percent of Kovir's revenue, this was a good thing! 

To Pont Vanis, which was considered to be a small village with a wooden palisade, went 
the Redanian messengers. After returning to the king they brought shocking news. 

Pont Vanis was not a village. It was a huge city, the summer capital of the kingdom of 
Kovir, whose ruler, King Gedovius, sent the king of Redania the following message: 

The kingdom of Kovir is nobody's vassal. The pretensions and claims of Tretogor are 
unfounded and are based on a law that is dead letter, which never had any effect. Tretogor's 
kings were never sovereign to Kovir because Kovir's lords, which is easy to check the 
records, never paid tribute to Tretogor or fulfilled military obligations nor, more importantly, 
were never invited to the celebrations of national holidays. Or any other. 

King Gedovius of Kovir passed to the messengers his apologies but he could not 
recognise King Radovid as his sovereign lord, let alone pay a tithe. The same is true for all of 
the subjects of Kovir as they owed their allegiance to the lordship of Kovir. 

In short, let Tretogor guard their own nose and not put it into the affairs of Kovir, an 
independent kingdom. 

The Redhead broke out in a cold rage. Independent kingdom? Foreign? All right, then 
we'll deal with Kovir as a hostile foreign kingdom. 

Redania, Kaedwen and Temeria, introduced to Kovir strict retaliatory measures. A Kovir 
merchant travelling south had to display their goods, like it or not, in any city in Redania and 
sell them. Or return home. The same was applied to merchants from the south travelling to 
Kovir. 

For goods that merchants transported by sea without landing in Redanian or Temerian 
ports, Redania demanded custom duties worthy of a pirate. Kovirian boats, of course, would 
not pay and only paid when they failed to flee. This game of cat and mouse that began in the 
sea soon came to an incident. A Redanian patrol boat tried to arrest a Kovir merchant but then 
appeared two frigates from Kovir, the patrol boat was set ablaze. And went down with all 
hands. 

That was the last straw. King Radovid the Red decided to teach his disobedient vassal 
manners. A Redanian army composed of four thousand men crossed the river Braa and the 
expeditionary force of Kaedwen moved towards Caingorn. 

After one week, the two thousand Redanians that had survived the crossing of the Braa in 
the opposite direction and the miserable remains of the Kaedwen army retreated home 
through the passes of the Mountains of Milan. 


The standing army of Kovir was made up of twenty-five thousand professionals skilled in 
war-and-robbery, mercenaries recruited from the farthest corners of the world, 
unconditionally loyal to the crown of Kovir by their unprecedented generosity and a pension 
guaranteed by contract. They were willing to face any danger for rewards of generosity never 
seen for each battle won. These rich solders were led into battle by experienced, talented, and 
now very rich, commanders, whom Benda of Kaedwen and Radovid III knew very well. 
They were officers who until recently had served in their own armies, but had unexpectedly 
asked for retirement and travelled abroad. 

Red was no fool, he was able to learn from his mistakes. He calmed the agitated generals 
demanding a crusade; he did not listen to the merchants, who demanded an economic 
blockade, to appease Benda of Kaedwen, who wanted revenge for the destruction of his elite 
units. Subsequently, he initiated peace talks. Even the humiliation did not deter him, a bitter 
pill that he had to swallow – Kovir agreed to the negotiations but in its own territory, Lan 
Exeter. The mountain had come to the prophet. 

They went to Lan Exeter as supplicants, thought Dijkstra, wrapping his cloak around him. 
As humiliated beggars. Just as I am today. 

The Redanian fleet entered into the Gulf of Praxeda and headed towards the beaches of 
Kovir. From the deck of the flagship, Alata, Radovid the Red, Benda of Kaedwen and the 
prelate of Novigrad, who joined them in the role of mediator, watched with amazement the 
sea wall rising from the sea and on which stood the squat walls and towers of the fortress that 
defended the entrance to the town of Pont Vanis. And sailing northward, towards the mouth 
of the Tango, the kings saw port after port, shipyard after shipyard and wharf after wharf. 
They saw a forest of masts and an ocean of white sails that hurt the eyes. Kovir, as it turned 
out, had a ready remedy for the blockade, retaliatory measures and the customs war. Kovir 
was evidently ready to rule the seas. 

 The Alata entered the wide mouth of the Tango and dropped anchor in the stone jaws of 
the outer harbour. But the kings, to their astonishment, were not expecting another trip by 
water. The city of Lan Exeter had no streets, but canals. Among them was the Grand Canal, 
the main artery and centre of the metropolis, which led directly from the port to the residence 
of the monarch. The Kings were transferred to a galley decorated with garlands and scarlet 
and gold with coat of arms, which the Red and Benda, to their amazement, recognised the 
eagle of Redania and the unicorn of Kaedwen. 

As they sailed down the Grand Canal, the kings and their cohorts looked around and 
remained silent. Actually it would be better to say that they were speechless. They were 
mistaken in thinking that they knew what was wealth and splendour, they were surprised by 
the manifestations of wealth and the demonstration of luxury. 

Sailing along the Grand Canal, they pasted an imposing edifice of the Admiralty and the 
office of the Guild of Merchants. They sailed along the promenade, filled with a colourful 
and richly dressed crowd. They sailed between a row of noble palaces and mansions of 
merchants that were reflected in the canal water in a rainbow of beautifully decorated facades 


but amazingly narrow. In Lan Exeter, they paid a tax for the front of the house, the wider the 
front, the progressively higher the tax. 

The only building with a lavishly wide front was the great winter residence of the 
monarch of Kovir, the Palace of Ensenada. On the stairs leading from the palace to the banks 
of the canal was waiting a welcoming committee made up of the royal couple, the monarch of 
Kovir, Gedovius, and his wife, Gemma. Their Majesties welcomed the guests politely, 
respectfully... And unusually. 'Dear Uncle,' Gedovius said to Radovid, 'Dear Grandfather,' 
Gemma smiled towards Benda. Gedovius was naturally a Trojdenian, while Gemma, as it 
happened, came from the lineage of the rebellious Aideen, who had fled Kaedwen and in 
whose veins ran the blood of the kings of Ard Carraigh. 

The proven relationship improved the mood and aroused sympathy, but did not help the 
negotiations. The 'Children' said what they wanted in a few words, the 'Grandparents' 
listened. And they signed a document that was later called for posterity The First Treaty of 
Lan Exeter. To distinguish it from those laid down later, the First Treaty also bears the name 
according to the first words of its preamble – Mare Liberum Apertum. 

The sea is free and open. Trade is free. The profits are sacred. Love your trade, profit and 
neighbour as your own. Obstructing someone's trading and profit is a violation of the laws of 
nature. And Kovir is nobody's vassal. It is an independent, self-governing and neutral 
kingdom. 

It did not seem that Gedovius and Gemma would made, if only out of courtesy, a 
concession, even the smallest to save the honour of Radovid and Benda. And yet they did. 
They agreed that Radovid the Red, until such a time as his death, in the official documents 
would retain the title of King of Kovir and Poviss and Benda, until such a time as his death, 
would be allowed to use the title of Sovereign of Caingorn and Malleore. 

Of course, with the caveat of non preiuducando. 

Gedovius and Gemma reigned for twenty-five years. The house of Trojden ended with his 
son, Gerard. Then Esteril Thyssen, founder of the House of Thyssen, ascended the throne of 
Kovir. 

After a short time the kings of Kovir were bound by blood to all the dynasties of the 
world and strongly adhered to the Treaties of Lan Exeter. They never interfered in the affairs 
of neighbours. Never tried to claim a foreign heritage, although more than once the king or 
prince of Kovir had every reason to be considered eligible to succeed the throne of Redania, 
or Aedirn, or Kaedwen, Cidaris, or Verden or even Rivia. Mighty Kovir never tried to annex 
further territory, never sent their ships of war equipped with ballista to foreign shores, never 
usurped the title 'Ruler of the seas.' Kovir was satisfied with the Mare Liberum Apertum, the 
sea is open and free to trade. Kovir professed a religion of trade and profit. 

And an absolute and undisturbed neutrality. 


Dijkstra adjusted the beaver collar on his coat to protect his neck from the wind and the 
falling rain. He looked around, dragged from his reverie. The water of the Grand Canal 
looked black. Through the fog appeared the building of the Admiralty, the pride of Lan 
Exeter, which looked like a barracks. Even the houses of the merchants had lost their usual 
splendour, and the narrow facades seemed narrower than normal. Or maybe they are damn 
narrower, though Dijkstra. If King Esterad has raised taxes, the greedy owners of the houses 
could have narrowed the facades. 

'How long have you had this nasty weather, Excellency?' he asked only to break the 
annoying silence. 

'Since mid-September, Count,' replied the ambassador. 'Since the full moon. It is going 
to be an early winter. Talgar has already had its first snowfall.' 

'I thought in Talgar the snow never melted,' Dijkstra said. 

The ambassador looked to make sure it was a joke and not ignorance. 

'In Talgar,' he joked too, 'winter begins in September and ends in May. The other 
seasons are spring and fall. There is also summer... It usually falls on the first Tuesday in 
August. And it lasts until Wednesday morning...' 

Dijkstra did not laugh. 

'But even there,' the ambassador's face clouded over, 'snow at the end of October is 
unique.' 

The ambassador, like most of the aristocracy of Redania, could not stand Dijkstra. The 
fact that he was to be subordinate to him, was a disgrace, and the fact that the Regency 
Council had appointed Dijkstra to take charge of negotiations with Kovir was a mortal insult. 
What infuriated him, De Ruyter, the most famous branch of the family of De Ruyter, Baron 
for nine generations, would call this Count spoilt and an upstart. But as an experienced 
diplomat he beautifully concealed his resentment. 

The oars rose and fell rhythmically, the ship glided swiftly through the canal. They were 
just passing beside the Palace of Culture and Art, a small but tasteful building. 

'Are we going to Ensenada?' 

'Yes, Count' confirmed the ambassador. 'The foreign minister pointed out that he would 
like to meet with you immediately after your arrival, So I'll lead you directly to Ensenada. In 
the afternoon we will send you by boat to the palace, as they would like to invite you to 
dinner...' 

'Excuse me, Excellency,' Dijkstra interrupted him quickly, 'but obligations do not allow 
me to accept. I have many issues to be resolved and soon, we must solve them at the expense 
of pleasure. Dinner will need to be another time. In happier, more peaceful times.' 


The ambassador bowed and furtively breathed a sigh of relief. 

 

*** 

 

Dijkstra entered Ensenada, of course, through the back door. With sincere delight. The 
main entrance of the monarch's winter residence was located under pediment supported on 
slender columns and was access directly from the Grand Canal through white marble stairs, 
which were impressive, but awfully long. The stairs leading to one of the many back doors 
were much less impressive but also much easier to walk up. Despite this, Dijkstra, as he 
walked, bit his lip and cursed under his breath so the guards, footmen and the butler who 
escorted him could not hear. 

Inside the palace he was expecting more stairs and a further climbing. Dijkstra again 
cursed softly. The moisture, cold and the uncomfortable position in the boat made his foot, 
which had been broken and cured by magic, begin to make its presence felt with a dull and 
unpleasant ache. And bad memories. Dijkstra clenched his teeth. He knew that the Witcher 
had also suffered broken bones. He hoped the Witcher also aches and wished with all his 
heart that it ache as long and strong as possible. 

Outside it was already dark; the corridors in Ensenada were also dark. However, the way 
that they went following the silent butler, was illuminated by a line of lackeys with candles. 
In front of the wooden doors to which the butler led him, were guards with halberds, tense 
and rigid as if they had a reserve halberd up their ass. There were more lackeys with candles, 
the light hurt the eyes. Dijkstra was surprised a little by the pomp with which he was greeted. 

He entered the room and stopped immediately, astonished. He bowed. 

'Welcome, Dijkstra,' said Esterad Thyssen, King of Kovir, Poviss, Narok, Velhad and 
Talgar. 'Do not stand at the door, come here, closer. Leave the labels outside; this is not an 
official audience.' 

'Your Majesty.' 

Esterad's wife, Queen Zuleyka, responded to his bow full of respect with a slight nod, 
never for a moment pausing with her crocheting. 

Apart from the royal couple, there was not a soul in the room. 

'That's right,' Esterad noticed his gaze, 'We'll talk in private, excuse me, just the six 
eyes. I consider this to be the most sensible solution.' 

Dijkstra sat in the chair that was opposite Esterad that was offered to him. The king wore 
across his shoulders an ermine, crimson mantle, a jacket and a matching velvet hat. Like all 
men of the House of Thyssen, he was tall, powerfully built and criminally handsome. He 


always looked sturdy and healthy, like a sailor who had just returned from sea, until it seemed 
that he emanated a scent of cold seawater and salty wind. As with all Thyssens, it was 
difficult to guess the exact age of the king. Looking at his hair, his complexion and hands, 
places that clearly showed age, he could guess that Esterad was forty-five. But Dijkstra knew 
that the king was fifty-six. 

'Zuleyka,' the King leaned towards his wife. 'Look at him. If you did not know he was a 
spy, would you believe it?' 

Queen Zuleyka was small, rather plumb and sympathetically plain. She was dressed in a 
manner typical for many women of her type, for whom fashion is just an empty concept. She 
wore a style of baggy clothes in shades of gray. Her hair was hidden under a bonnet, which 
she had apparently inherited from her grandmother. She did not wear any jewellery or use 
makeup. 

'A good book teaches us,' she said in a soft, pleasant voice, 'that we should be cautious in 
judging our neighbours. For we will also be judged. And certainly not for our appearance.' 

Esterad Thyssen gave his wave a warm look. It was not secret that he loved her 
immeasurably. Love, which for twenty-nine years of marriage had never waned, and still 
clearly burned. Esterad, so it was claimed, had never betrayed Zuleyka ever. Dijkstra did not 
think too much on something so unlikely, but he had more than three times tried to insert a 
female agent into the king's favour, to gather information. Nothing had ever come of it. 

'I do not like beating around the bush,' said the king, 'so I am going to get to the point of 
why I decided to talk to you personally. There are several reasons. First, I know that you do 
not shy away from bribery. In fact, I am sure of my officials, but why expose them to such 
trials, and great temptation? Why did you intend to offer as a bride to the minister of foreign 
affairs?' 

'A thousand Novigradian crowns,' said the spy, unblinking. 'If he had bargained I would 
have gone as high as fifteen hundred.' 

'And that is why I like you,' Esterad said after a moment of silence. 'You're a fucking 
bastard. I remember my own youth. I look and I see myself at your age.' 

Dijkstra thanked him with a bow. He was only eight years younger than the king. He was 
sure that Esterad knew exactly that. 

'You're a fucking bastard,' repeated the king, frowning. 'But a bastard who is decent and 
honest. And that is a rarity in these wretched times.' 

Dijkstra bowed again. 

'You see,' continued Esterad. 'In every country you can find blind fanatics seeking the 
idea of a social order. They are so committed to that idea that they are willing to do anything. 
Perhaps even commit the worst crimes, because according to them the end justifies the means 
and justifies their actions. They do not kill, they safeguard the order. They do not torture, or 


blackmail, they protect the right of state and the struggle for order. The life of an individual if 
the individual interferes with their dogmas, their established rules, such people are not even 
worth a shrug. They never become aware that the society they serve consist of precisely these 
individuals. These people have a so-called broad outlook... Such a view is the surest way not 
to see other people.' 

'Nicodemus de Boot,' Dijkstra said. 

'Almost, but not quite,' the king of Kovir showed his alabaster teeth. 'Vysogota of Corvo. 
A lesser-known philosopher and ethicist, but also very good. Read him, I recommend it. 
There will still be a book in your country, they will not all been burned. But to the point, to 
the point. You, Dijkstra, also use unscrupulous, intrigue, bribery, blackmail and torture. You 
do not blink an eye when sentencing someone to death or ordering a covert assassination. The 
fact that you do everything for the kingdom you serve faithfully, does not excuse you nor 
earn my sympathy. Not at all. Know this.' 

The spy nodded to indicate that he knew. 

'But you,' said Esterad, 'as I said, are a bastard character. So I appreciate and respect you, 
which is why I have offered you a private audience. For you, Dijkstra, having on many 
occasions being able to make yourself millions, you have never in your life done anything for 
personal gain or stolen a penny from the state treasury. Not even half a farthing. Zuleyka, 
look! He blushed, or did I just imagine it?' 

The queen looked up from her needlework. 

'When you see the colour of modesty you will know the appearance of authenticity,' she 
quoted a passage from the Good Book, but she could see that on the face of the spy there was 
not a trace of a blush. 

'Well,' said Esterad. 'Let's move onto more serious matters. He has crossed the sea 
directed by patriotic duty. Redania, his homeland is in danger. After the tragic death of King 
Vizimir, chaos reigns there. Redania is governed by a band of aristocratic idiots called the 
Council of Regency. This band, my Zuleyka is not going to do anything for Redania. At the 
moment of danger they will flee or lie down like dogs and lick the pearl adorned boots of the 
Nilfgaardian Emperor. Dijkstra is despised by this band because he is a spy, murderer and 
upstart, but it was Dijkstra who has crossed the sea to save Redania. Showing who it is that 
really cares for Redania.' 

Esterad Thyssen paused to catch his breath and adjusted his hat , which had slipped lower 
onto his forehead. 

'Well, Dijkstra,' said the king, 'what plagues your kingdom? Except for a lack of money, 
I mean?' 

'Except for a lack of money,' the spy's face was like stone, 'nothing, everyone is healthy, 
thank you.' 


'Ah,' the King nodded and again moved the hat back onto his head. 'Ah. I understand. I 
understand and applaud the idea. When you have money, you can buy a cure for every 
ailment. The important thing is to have money. And you do not have it. If you did then you 
would not be here. Is my reasoning correct?' 

'No objection.' 

'And how much do you need, out of curiosity?' 

'Not much. A million.' 

'Not much?' said Esterad, with an exaggerated gesture, grabbing his hat in both hands. 
'This is not much? Ay, ay.' 

'For Your Majesty,' stammered the spy,' this amount is only a pittance...' 

'A pittance?' the King released his hat and raised his hands towards the ceiling. 'Ay, ay! 
A million is a pittance; did you hear what he said, Zuleyka? Did you know, Dijkstra that one 
million and one million are together two million? I understand that you and Philippa Eilhart 
are frantically rushing to build a defence against Nilfgaard, but what do you want? To buy all 
of Nilfgaard?' 

Dijkstra did not answer. Zuleyka crocheted with eagerness. Esterad during this time, 
pretended to be admiring the naked nymph painted on the ceiling. 

'Follow me,' he suddenly stood up and nodded to the spy. They went to a huge painting 
showing King Gedovius sitting on a grey horse with a sceptre of the military pointing to 
something not on the canvas, probably in the right direction. Esterad dug out of his pocket a 
tiny gilded wand, and touched the picture frame, uttering an incantation under his breath. 
Gedovius and the grey horse disappeared and in their place was a map of the known world. 
The King touched the wand to the edge of the map and it magically changed scale, bringing 
closer the visible world of the Yaruga Valley and the four kingdoms. 

'Blue is Nilfgaard,' he explained. 'Red is for the kingdoms... Or rather what is left of 
them. What the hell are you looking at? Look here!' 

Dijkstra looked away from the other paintings, mostly of seafaring acts and scenes. He 
wondered which of them would camouflage, Esterad's other famous maps that showed the 
commercial intelligence and military of Kovir, the complete network of blackmail and bribed 
informants, operational contacts, saboteurs and paid murderers. He knew there was such a 
map and had long sought without success how to find it. 

'The red is your Kingdoms, Esterad repeated. 'It looks bad, huh?' 

Bad, Dijkstra admitted to himself. Lately he did nothing but look at strategic maps, but 
now, looking at Esterad's map, the situation seemed even worse. The blue squares were in the 
shape of a terrible dragon's maw, ready at any time to catch and tear with their teeth the poor 
red squares. 


Esterad looked around for something that might serve as a pointer to the map, and finally 
pulled out a decorative rapier. 

'Nilfgaard,' he started his lesson, pointing with his rapier when needed, 'attacked Lyria 
and Aedirn as a casus belli by declaring an attack on the frontier fort of Glevitzingen. I'm not 
interested to find out who actually attacked Glevitzingen and in what disguise. I also consider 
it senseless in wondering how many days or hours the armed actions of Emhyr preceded a 
similar undertaking in Aedirn and Temeria. I will leave that to the historians. I am most 
interested in the current situation and what will come tomorrow. At this time, Nilfgaard is in 
Dol Angra and Aedirn and protected by a buffer state in the form of the Elvish domain Dol 
Blathanna, which borders on a portion of Aedirn that King Henselt of Kaedwen, to talk 
picturesquely, ripped from Emhyr's mouth and ate himself.' 

Dijkstra did not comment. 

'I will also leave to the historians the moral assessment of the performance of King 
Henselt,' continued Esterad. 'But a look at the map suffices to show that with the annexation 
of the Northern Marches, Henselt is blocking Emhyr's way into the Pontar Valley. Protecting 
the flank of Temeria. And yours, Redania. You ought to thank him.' 

'I'll thank him,' muttered Dijkstra. 'But silently. In Tretogor we are hosting King 
Demavend of Aedirn. And Demavend has quite an explicit assessment of the moral conduct 
of Henselt. He is accustomed to expressing it in short but sonorous words.' 

'I can imagine,' the King of Kovir nodded. 'Let us leave this for a moment and look to 
the south to the Yaruga River. In attacking Dol Angra, Emhyr secured his flank while signing 
a separate peace treaty with Foltest of Temeria. But immediately after completing his war 
efforts in Aedirn, the emperor broke the pact and unceremoniously attacked Brugge and 
Sodden. With his cowardly pact, Foltest gained two weeks of peace. More precisely, sixteen 
days. And today is the twenty-six of October.' 

'It is.' 

'The situation on October twenty-six is as follows: Sodden and Brugge are occupied. The 
fortresses of Mayena and Razwan have fallen. The Temerian army was defeated at the Battle 
of Maribor, driven back north. Maribor is besieged. This morning they were still holding. But 
it is evening now, Dijkstra.' 

'Maribor will stand. Nilfgaard could not have surrounded them.' 

'That is true. They have penetrated too deeply into foreign territory, stretching their 
supply lines and leaving their flank dangerously exposed. Before the coming of winter they 
will be forced to break their siege and withdraw to the Yaruga and shorten their front. But 
what will happen in the spring, Dijkstra? What will happen when the grass comes out from 
under the snow? Come. Look at the map.' 

Dijkstra looked. 


'Look at the map,' repeated the king. 'I'll tell you what Emhyr var Emreis will do in the 
spring.' 

 

*** 

 

'With spring will begin an offensive on an unprecedented scale,' Carthia van Canten 
announced, arranging her golden curls before the mirror. 'Oh, I know this information in 
itself is not revolutionary, in every rural woman gossip circle they are talking about the 
offensive.' 

Assire var Anahid was exceptionally angry and impatient that day, yet managed to 
contain and not express the question about why on earth she listened to this banal 
information. But she knew Cantarella. If Cantarella started talking about something, she had 
good reasons. And her conclusions were usually accurate. 

'I, however, know a little more than the village gossip,' said Cantarella. 'Vattier told me 
everything about what was discussed at the meeting with the Emperor. He even brought me a 
folder with maps and when he fell asleep, I looked for myself... Shall I continue?' 

'Certainly,' Assire narrowed her eyes. 'Speak, my dear.' 

'The direction of the main attack is, of course, Temeria, the Pontar River, Novigrad, 
Vizima and Ellander. The Centre Army Group, under the command of Menno Coehoorn, will 
strike. The flanking armies will be the East Army Group, which will strike from Aedirn's 
Pontar valley and Kaedwen...' 

'From Kaedwen?' Assire raised her eyebrows. 'Does this mean the end of a fragile 
friendship, concluded once the spoils are divided?' 

'Kaedwen threatens the right flank,' Carthia van Canten opened her mouth slightly. Her 
doll's mouth was a terrible contrast to the strategic wisdom she was speaking. 'The attack 
will be preventive in nature. A detachment of the East Army Group will attack King Henselt 
and head off any possible aid to Temeria.' 

'From the west,' continued the blonde, 'will attack the Verden Operations Group, with 
the task of controlling Cidaris and blocking Novigrad, Gors Velen and Vizima. The General 
Staff foresees a long siege of the three cities.' 

'You have not mentioned the names of the heads of the two army groups.' 

'The East Group, Ardal aep Dahy,' smiled Cantarella, 'and Verden, Joachim de Wett.' 

Assire blinked in surprise. 


'Interesting,' she said. 'The two nobles offended that their daughters were excluded from 
Emhyr's marriage plans. Our Emperor is either very naïve or very clever.' 

'If Emhyr knew anything about the noble's conspiracy,' said Carthia, 'it was not from 
Vattier. He did not say anything to him.' 

'Go on.' 

'Never before has there been a military operation of this scale. In total, counting the 
frontline units, reserves, auxiliary services and the rear-guard, the operation will be attended 
by over three hundred thousand people. And elves, of course.' 

'The date of commencement?' 

'Not stated. The main problem is the supplies. And the problem with the supplies is the 
state of the roads. No one can predict when winter will end.' 

'And what else did Vattier speak of?' 

'He complained, poor thing,' Cantarella said flashing her teeth. 'The Emperor humiliated 
him again and rebuked him. In front of others. Again the reason was the mysterious 
disappearance of Stefan Skellen and his entire department. Emhyr publicly called Vattier 
incompetent and said that he was a head of a service that instead of making people disappear 
without a trace, are surprised with the disappearances. He constructed on this topic a 
malicious pun, which Vattier could not accurately repeat. Then the Emperor jokingly asked 
Vattier if this means that there is another secret organisation in this country, concealed even 
from him. He is cunning, our Emperor. He was close.' 

'Close.' Assire murmured. 'What else, Carthia?' 

'The agent who Vattier put in Skellen's band and who disappeared along with him, was 
named Neratin Ceka. Vattier must value him very much, because he was extremely angry 
about his disappearance.' 

I, too, thought Assire, am furious by the disappearance of Jediah Mekesser. But I, unlike 
Vattier de Rideaux, I will soon know what happened. 

'And Rience? Vattier did not contact him again?' 

'I think not. Vattier did not mention it.' 

Both were silent a moment. The silence was broken by Assire's cat purring loudly. 

'Lady Assire.' 

'Yes, Carthia.' 

'Do I have to play the role of the silly lover for a long time? I would like to go back to 
school, to devote myself to scientific research...' 


'Soon,' interrupted Assire. 'A little bit longer. Hold on, girl.' 

Cantarella sighed. 

They ended the conversation and said goodbye. Assire var Anahid' cat jumped from the 
chair and she began to read the letter from Fringilla Vigo again, who was in Toussaint. She 
remained lost in thought. This letter was the cause of her restlessness, hiding between the 
lines, Assire felt, was some significance that she had yet to decipher. It was long after 
midnight when Assire var Anahid, Nilfgaardian witch, set up the megascope and established 
a telecommunication to the castle of Montecalvo in Redania. 

Philippa Eilhart was in a short nightgown with thin straps and her face and neck had 
traces of lipstick. Assire, with a great effort of will, contained an expression of displeasure. 
Never, ever, will I understand this. And I do not want to understand. 

'Can we speak freely?' 

Philippa's hand made a sweeping gesture. And she surrounded herself with a magic 
sphere of discretion. 

'Now, yes.' 

'I have information,' Assire said dryly. 'By itself, it is not revolutionary, gossip from 
rural farmer's wives around a well. However...' 

 

*** 

 

'All of Redania,' Esterad Thyssen said, looking at his map, 'can at this moment enlist 
thirty-five thousand line soldiers, including four thousand heavy cavalry. In round figures, of 
course.' 

Dijkstra nodded. The figure was quite accurate. 

'Demavend and Meve had an army like that. Emhyr broke it in twenty-six days. The same 
will happen to the armies of Redania and Temeria, if not quickly reinforced. I approve of 
your idea, Dijkstra, yours and Philippa Eilhart's. You need soldiers. You need experienced 
cavalry, well trained and well equipped. You need horses more than a million lintars.' 

The spy nodded confirmed that this calculation was beyond reproach. 

'As you no doubt know, however,' the king continued dryly, 'Kovir always was and 
always will be neutral. A treaty binds us to the empire of Nilfgaard, signed by my 
grandfather, Esteril Thyssen and the Emperor Fergus var Emreis. The letter of the treaty does 
not allow Kovir to support the enemies of Nilfgaard with military aid. Neither money nor 
troops.' 


'When Emhyr var Emreis is finished with Redania and Temeria,' Dijkstra cleared his 
throat, 'he will look north. Emhyr will not have enough. It may be that your treaty will soon 
not be worth a damn. Not long ago we talked about Foltest of Temeria, who treaty with 
Nilfgaard served to not buy him more than sixteen days of peace...' 

'Oh, dear,' Esterad smiled. 'Such arguments I cannot in good conscience accept. Treaties 
are like marriage: you cannot enter into it with the idea of possible treachery, there is no place 
for suspicion. And those who don't like it, should not get married. Because you cannot be 
stags without being married, but I admit that the fear of the horns is a rather ridiculous and 
pathetic excuse for forced celibacy. And the horns of marriage, do not touch on the subject of 
'what if'... As long as there are no horns, it does not touch on that subject, and if they do, 
then there is no talk about it. Speaking of horns, how's the husband of the beautiful Marie, 
the Marquis de Mercey, Minister of Finance for Redania?' 

'Your Majesty,' Dijkstra bowed stiffly, 'has enviable informants.' 

'Certainly, I do,' acknowledged the King, 'you would be amazed at how many and how 
honourable. But you also should not be ashamed of your own. Those who you have in my 
palaces here and in Pont Vanis. Oh my word, each of them deserves the highest honour.' 

Dijkstra did not even blink. 

'Emhyr var Emreis,' Esterad continued, looking at the nymphs on the ceiling, 'also has 
some good, well established agents. So I repeat – for reasons of state Kovir neutrality is the 
principal pacta sunt servanda. Kovir does not violate treaties. Kovir does not violate even to 
precede the violation of the treaty by the other party.' 

'I dare to notice,' Dijkstra said, 'that Redania does not urge Kovir to break the treaty. 
Redania is in no way seeking an alliance or military assistance from Kovir against Nilfgaard. 
Redania wants to... to borrow a small sum of money that they will return...' 

'I don't see,' interrupted the king, 'how you are going to return it as we are not going to 
lend you a penny. And spare me the hypocritical manoeuvres, Dijkstra, because you are stuck 
like a bib to a wolf. Do you have any other arguments, serious, intelligent or accurate?' 

'I'm afraid not.' 

'You're lucky that you became a spy,' Esterad Thyssen said after a pause. 'In trade, you 
would not have made a career.' 

 

*** 

 

Since the world began, all royal couples have had separate bedrooms. Kings – with very 
different frequencies – have visited the rooms of the queens and there are instances where the 


queens have unexpectedly visited the rooms of the kings. Then the couples went off to their 
own chambers and beds. 

The royal couple of Kovir in this regard were an exception. Esterad Thyssen and Zuleyka 
always slept together in one bedroom in a huge bed with a huge canopy. 

Before bed, Zuleyka put on glasses, something she was ashamed to show in front of her 
subjects and read the Good Book. Esterad Thyssen usually talked. This night was no 
different. Esterad put on his nightcap and took his sceptre in hand. He liked to hold the 
sceptre and have fun with it, but did not do so in public because he feared his subjects would 
call him pretentious. 

'You know, Zuleyka,' he confided. 'Lately I have had strange dreams. Several times I 
have dreamed about my mother. Standing over me and repeating, 'I have a wife for Tankred, 
I have a wife for Tankred'. And she shows me a nice but very young girl. Do you know who 
the girl is, Zuleyka? Ciri, Calanthe's granddaughter. Remember Calanthe, Zuleyka?' 

'Of course I remember, my husband.' 

'Cirilla of Cintra,' Esterad continued talking, playing with the sceptre, 'is said to be 
chosen to marry Emhyr of Nilfgaard. The Emperor's intention surprised everyone... How the 
devil, could she become Tankred's wife?' 

'Our Tankred,' the queen's voice was soft as always when talking about her son, 'needs a 
woman. Perhaps if he settled...' 

'Maybe,' Esterad sighed. 'Although I doubt he can. In any case, marriage has a chance. 
Hmmm... This Ciri... Ha! Kovir and Cintra. The mouth of the Yaruga! It sounds good. Not a 
bad marriage... Not a bad alliance... But if Emhyr has his eye on the little one... Only, why 
did she appear to me in my dreams? Why the devil did I dream this nonsense? At the 
equinox, you remember, I woke up then too... Brrr, what a nightmare, I'm glad that I cannot 
remember the details... Humm... Do I still call on an astrologer? A soothsayer? A medium?' 

'Lady Síle de Tansarville is in Lan Exeter.' 

'No,' the king frowned. 'I do not want that witch. Too smart. She is becoming another 
Philippa Eilhart! These wise women smell of too much power, you cannot embolden their 
privileges or trusts.' 

'As always, you're right, husband.' 

'Hmmm... But these dreams...' 

'The Good Book,' Zuleyka turned a few pages, 'says that when humans sleep, the gods 
will open their ears and speak. Meanwhile, the Prophet Lebioda teaches that seeing a dream, 
you see either great wisdom or great folly. The important thing is to know how to recognise 
it.' 


'The marriage of Tankred to Emhyr's promised bride seems like no great wisdom,' 
Esterad sighed. 'And speaking of wisdom, I would be very happy if it came to me in a dream. 
It is the thing for which we gave been visited by Dijkstra. It is a difficult issue. Because you 
know, my dearest Zuleyka, there is no reason to be happy that Nilfgaard will be coming north 
to conquer Novigrad any day. From Novigrad everything, our neutrality looks different from 
the far South. It would be good if Redania and Temeria contain the advance of Nilfgaard and 
turns the assault back to the Yaruga. But would it be right to do so with our money? Are you 
listening, dear?' 

'I hear you, husband.' 

'And what do you say?' 

'All wisdom is contained in the Good Book.' 

'And does your Good Book says we would get a visit from Dijkstra asking for a million 
linters?' 

'The book,' Zuleyka blinked from behind her glasses, 'does not say anything about 
unworthy mammon. But in one passage it says that it is more blessed to give than to receive 
and helping the poor with charity is noble. It says – give to all, and it will make your soul 
noble.' 

'And great dinners fill graves,' Esterad Thyssen murmured. 'Zuleyka, apart from the 
passages that deal with the noble soul, does the book share some wisdom on business? What 
does the book say, for example about exchange of equivalent?' 

The queen adjusted her glasses and quickly flicked through the pages. 

'And they gave to Jacob all the strange gods, and Jacob hid them.' 

Esterad was silent for a long time. 

'Or perhaps,' he said at last, 'something else?' 

Zuleyka returned to searching the Good Book. 

'I found,' she soon announced, something in the wisdom of the prophet Lebioda. Shall I 
read it?' 

'Please.' 

'And the prophet Lebioda says: indeed, give to the poor in abundance. But instead of 
giving to the poor all the melon, give him only half a melon, to the poor it will seem like 
luck.' 

'Half a melon,' snorted Esterad Thyssen. 'You mean half a million linters? You know, 
Zuleyka that having half a million and not having half a million, it all adds up to a million?' 


'You did not let me finish,' the queen chided her husband with a stern look over her 
glasses. 'The Prophet Lebioda continues – it is even better to give the poor a quarter or a 
melon. And the best part is to get someone else to give a melon to the poor. Because I tell you 
that there is always someone who has a melon and is willing to give to the poor – if not from 
generosity, then for calculations for very different reasons.' 

'Ha!' The King of Kovir struck his sceptre on the nightstand. 'Indeed the prophet was a 
smart guy! Arrange to have someone else give instead on me? I like that, those are truly 
golden words. Search the wisdom of that prophet, my dear Zuleyka. I'm sure you will still 
find something that will allow me to fix my problems with Redania and the army Redania 
wants to organise with my money.' 

Zuleyka turned the pages in the book for a while until she finally started reading. 

'One day one of the Prophet Lebioda's disciples came to him and said – Advise me, 
Master, what shall I do? My neighbour wishes for my favourite dog. If I give him my pet, my 
heart will break with grief. If I do not give it to him then he will be unhappy because my 
refusal will hurt my neighbour. What should I do?'Have you something,' asked the prophet, 
'you love less than your beloved dog?' I have, Master, replied the disciple, a stray cat, a 
wicked pet that I have never loved. And the Prophet Lebioda said – 'Take your stray cat and 
give it to your neighbour. In this case you'll find happiness twice. You get rid of the cat and 
your neighbour will rejoice. Because most of the time, the neighbour will not be pleased so 
much with the gift, but knowing that he was gifted.' 

Esterad was silent for some time, his forehead wrinkled. 

'Zuleyka?' he asked at last. 'Is that the same prophet?' 

'Take the stray cat...' 

'I heard the first time!' cried the king, but immediately recovered. 'Forgive me, my dear, 
the thing is I do not understand what cats have to do with it...' 

He fell silent. And fell into deep thought. 

 

*** 

 

After eighty-five years, the situation had changed so that people could speak on certain 
matters without fear, and could speak of Guiscard Vermuellen, Duke of Creyden, grandson of 
Esterad Thyssen, son of his eldest daughter, Gaudemunda. Duke Guiscard was already a 
gray-haired old man, but the events he witnessed, he remembered well. It was indeed Duke 
Guiscard who revealed where the one million lintars came from with which the Redanians 
used to equip it cavalry for the war with Nilfgaard. The one million did not come, as 
expected, from the treasury of Kovir, but from the chief of Novigrad's coffers. Esterad 


Thyssen, revealed Guiscard, got the money from Novigrad for their participation in newly 
formed overseas trading companies. The paradox was that those companies had been formed 
with the active cooperation of Nilfgaardian merchants. The venerable Duke's revelations 
therefore showed that Nilfgaard – to some extent – had helped pay to organise the Redanian 
army. 

'My grandfather,' recalled Guiscard Vermuellen, 'said something about melons, smiling 
slyly. He said that there will always be ones who want to give to the poor, even if only from 
calculations. He also said that since Nilfgaard itself is helping the strength and fighting 
capacity of the Redanian army, they could have no complaints about others.' 

'Then,' the old man continued, 'my grandfather called father, who was then the head of 
the intelligence and Interior Minister. When he found out what his orders were, he fell into a 
panic. The order was to release from prison, internment camps and exile more than three 
thousand people. In addition, hundreds were to have their house arrest lifted.' 

'No, it was not just thieves, common criminals and hired mercenaries. The amnesty 
covered all dissidents. Among those affected by the amnesty were the supporters of the 
deposed usurper King Rhyd. The Interior Minister was shocked and very worried about his 
father.' 

'Meanwhile,' the Duke said, 'grandfather laughed as if it was the best of jokes. And then 
he said, I remember every word, 'It is a great shame, gentlemen, that you do not have such 
bedtime reading as the Good Book. If you did, you would understand the ideas of your 
monarch. And so you will follow your orders, not understanding them. But do not worry 
unnecessarily, your monarch knows what he does. And now go and release all my stray cats 
and wicked pests.' 

'That's what he said, stray cats and pests. And so it was, that no one could know, they 
would became future heroes and warlords in glory and fame. These 'cats' of grandfather were 
the famous condottieri – Adam 'Adieu' Pangratt, Lorenzo Molla, Juan 'Frontino' Gutierrez... 
And Julia Abatemarco, who became famous in Redania as 'Pretty Kitty'... You young people 
do not remember, but in my day, when we played war, every kid wanted to be 'Adieu' 
Pangratt and every girl wanted to be Julia 'Pretty Kitty'... And for grandfather they were the 
sly cats.' 

'Then,' Guiscard Vermuellen murmured, 'grandfather took me by the hand and led me to 
the terrace, where grandmother Zuleyka was feeding the seagulls. Grandpa said... said...' 

The old man slowly and with effort tried to recall the words that eighty-five years ago 
Esterad Thyssen said to his wife, Queen Zuleyka, on the terrace of the palace of Ensenada, 
high above the Great Canal. 

'You know, my dearest wife, I've seen another wisdom from the Prophet Lebioda? One 
that will still give me an advantage over having donated my cats to Redania. Cats, my 
Zuleyka, come home. Cats always come home. And when my cats return, bringing home 
their wages, their booty, their riches... I will tax those cats!' 


 

*** 

 

When King Esterad Thyssen spoke one last time with Dijkstra, he did so alone, without 
even Zuleyka. On the floor of the giant ballroom, was a ten-year-old boy, but he did not count 
because he was so busy playing with his tin soldiers to pay attention to any of the talking. 

'This is Guiscard,' Esterad explained, pointing to the boy with a nod of his head, 'my 
grandson, son of Gaudemunda and that rascal, Duke Vermuellen. But this small child, 
Guiscard, is the only hope of Kovir if something was to happen to Tankred Thyssen... If 
something happened to Tankred...' 

 Dijkstra already knew Kovir's problem and Esterad's person problem. He knew 
something had already happened to Tankred. If the boyo had any talent at all to be a king, it 
was to only be a bad king. 

'Your business,' Esterad changed the subject, 'has been essentially settled. You can start 
reconsidering how to most effectively use the one million lintars, which will soon find its 
way into the Tretogor treasury.' 

He bent down and picked up one of the garishly painted tin soldiers, a rider with a raised 
sword. 

'Take this and keep it safe. The one who shows you the second, identical soldier will be 
my messenger, despite his appearance, though you cannot lend credence to any of my men 
who know the business of our million. All others will be provocateurs and you have to treat 
them as provocateurs.' 

'Redania,' Dijkstra bowed, 'will not forget this, Your Majesty. I, in their name, would 
like to assure you of my personal gratitude.' 

'No gratitude, bring in that thousand with which you planned to get the goodwill of my 
minister. What, does the goodwill of a king not deserve a bribe?' 

'Your Royal Majesty it was lowered to...' 

'Lowered, I can bet it was lowered. Bring me the money, Dijkstra. Having a thousand and 
a thousand...' 

'Added together is two thousand. I know.' 

 

*** 

 


In a distant wing of Ensenada, in a room much smaller in size, the sorceress Síle de 
Tansarville listened intently and solemnly to the testimony of Queen Zuleyka. 

'Perfect,' she bowed her head. 'Perfect, Your Majesty.' 

'I did everything as you advised me, Lady Síle.' 

'Thank you for that. And once again I assure you that we are acting for a just cause. For 
the sake of the country. And the dynasty.' 

Queen Zuleyka cleared her throat, her voice changed slightly. 

'And... and Tankred, Lady Síle?' 

'I gave my word,' said Síle de Tansarville in a cold voice. 'I gave my word that I would 
return your help with my help. Your Majesty can sleep peacefully.' 

'I very much wish too,' Zuleyka said. 'With all my heart. And speaking of dreams... The 
King begins to suspect something. Those dreams surprise him, and when something surprises 
the king, he begins to suspect...' 

'For a time I will stop inspiring the dreams of the king,' promised the sorceress. 'Let us 
return to the sleep of the queen, I repeat, it must be peaceful. Prince Tankred will be 
separated from bad company. He will no longer frequent the castle of Baron Surcratasse. Or 
to the house of Lady de Lisemore. Or to the Redanian ambassadors.' 

'There will be no more visits to these persons? Ever?' 

'The people mentioned,' the dark eyes of Síle de Tansarville glowed strangely, 'dare not 
invite or deceive Prince Tankred anymore. They will never dare. They are aware of the 
consequences. I guarantee my words. I also guarantee that Prince Tankred will resume 
learning and be a diligent student, a serious and sober young man. He will stop chasing skirts. 
He will lose the passion... until such a time as we present him to Ciri, princess of Cintra.' 

'Oh, I just cannot believe it,' Zuleyka clasped her hands together. 'I just can't believe it.' 

'The power of magic,' Síle de Tansarville smiled unexpectedly to herself, 'is sometimes 
hard to believe, Your Majesty. And so indeed it should be.' 

 

*** 

 

Philippa Eilhart adjusted the shoulder straps of her translucent nightgown and wiped the 
crimson lipstick from her neck. Such a wise woman, thought Síle de Tansarville with a slight 
distaste, and yet she does not know how to keep her hormones in check. 

'Can we talk?' 


Philippa surrounded herself with a sphere of discretion. 

'We can now.' 

'All is arranged in Kovir. Positively.' 

'Thank you. Has Dijkstra already sailed?' 

'Not yet.' 

'What is he waiting for?' 

'He is having a long conversation with Esterad Thyssen,' Síle de Tansarville pursed her 
lips. 'They have found a common ground with suspicion – King and spy.' 

 

*** 

 

'You know that joke about the weather here, Dijkstra? That Kovir only has two 
seasons...' 

'Winter and Summer. I know...' 

'Do you how to recognise that summer has already started in Kovir?' 

No. How?' 

'The rain gets somewhat warmer.' 

'Ha, ha.' 

'Jokes are jokes,' Esterad said seriously, 'but these winters that are coming faster and 
getting longer are making me a bit uneasy. This was prophesied. Have you read, I think, the 
prophecy of Ithlinne? It says that a decade's of endless winter approaches. Some argue that 
this is some allegory, but I harbour certain fears. In Kovir we once had four years of winter, 
bad weather, poor harvests. If it were not for a massive importation of food from Nilfgaard 
the people would have begun to starve. Can you imagine?' 

'To be honest, no.' 

'I do. In the cooling climate we can all starve. Hunger is the enemy, with which it can be 
damn hard to make war.' 

The spy nodded thoughtfully. 

'Dijkstra?' 

'Your Royal Highness?' 


'Do you find peace in the countryside?' 

'Not much. But I try' 

'I know there is much talk about it. From those who betrayed Thanedd, only Vilgefortz is 
alive.' 

'After the death of Yennefer, yes. You know, Your Majesty that Yennefer was killed? 
She died on the last day of August, under mysterious circumstances, in the famous Sedna 
Abyss, between the Islands of Skellige and the Cape of Peixe de Mar.' 

'Yennefer of Vengerberg,' Esterad said slowly, 'was not a traitor. She was not an ally of 
Vilgefortz. If you want I can provide you evidence.' 

'I do not want it,' Dijkstra said after a pause. 'Or maybe I do want it, but not now. She is 
more convenient to me as a traitor.' 

'I understand. Do not trust wizards, Dijkstra. Philippa in particular.' 

'I've never trusted her. But we have to collaborate. Without he Redania would sink into 
chaos and disappear.' 

'You're right. But if I can offer some advice, loosen up a little. You know what I mean. 
Gallows and torture chambers all around the country, cruelties against the elves... And that 
awful fort, Drakenborg. I know you do it for patriotism. But you build yourself into a legend 
of evil. In this legend you are a werewolf after innocent blood.' 

'Someone has to do it.' 

'And there will be someone to blame. I know that you are trying to be fair, but mistakes 
can simply not be avoided. You can't continue to remain clean of all the blood. You've never 
hurt anyone out of your own interest, but who is going to believe that? Who is going to 
believe? One day fate will turn and accuse you of killing innocent people and reaping the 
benefits. A lie sticks to a man like tar.' 

'I know.' 

'You have a chance to defend yourself. The tar will cover you... later. After the fact. 
Beware, Dijkstra.' 

'I'll beware. They will not get me.' 

'They took your king, Vizimir. From what I hear, with a dagger in the side to the hilt...' 

'A king is easier to hit than a spy. They cannot reach me. Never catch me.' 

'They must not. You know why, Dijkstra? Because in this hell of a world, at least there is 
some justice.' 

 


*** 

 

There came a day when both recalled that conversation. Both of them. The King and the 
spy. Dijkstra remembered the words of Esterad of Kovir when he heard the footsteps of 
murderers who came for him on all sides, throughout the corridors of the castle. Esterad 
recalled the words of Dijkstra on the ostentatious marble stairs that led from Ensenada to the 
Grand Canal. 

 

*** 

 

'He could have fought,' Guiscard Vermuellen continued, his blind, clouded eyes driving 
deep into the abyss of his memories. 'It was only three assassins and my grandfather was a 
strong man. He could have fought and defended until I got the guards. He could have simply 
run away. But there was grandmother Zuleyka. Grandfather shielded and protected Zuleyka 
and only Zuleyka and did not care about himself. When at last help came, Zuleyka had not a 
scratch. Esterad had received more than twenty stab wounds. He died after three hours 
without regaining consciousness.' 

 

*** 

 

'Have you ever read the Good Book, Dijkstra?' 

'No, Your Majesty. But I know what is written in there.' 

'Just imagine, yesterday I opened it at random. And I came across this passage – 'On the 
way to eternity all walk down their stairs carrying their own burden.' What do you think of 
that?' 

'Time is running out, King Esterad. It's time to carry our own burden.' 

'Take care, spy.' 

'Take care, king.' 

 

*** 

 

 


We left the ancient and famous festival in Assengard and travelled sixteen leagues south, into 
the countryside known as Hundredlakes. If one looks on that region from above, one sees 
numerous lakes that form all kinds of artful arrangements and patterns. Our guide, the Elf 
Avallac'h, called for us to look among these patterns for one that resembled a Trifolium leaf. 
And indeed, we found such. Which ended up being not three lakes but four, for one was an 
oblong shape, extending from south to north, as it was the stem of the leaf. That lake, now 
called Tarn Mira, was surrounded by a black forest, and at its northern edge should have 
risen up that mysterious bastion that is called the Tower of the Swallow, or in the language of 
elves: Tor Zireael. 

On that day, however, we saw nothing but fog. Before we could even ask the elf Avallac'h 
about the tower, he commanded us to silence with a gesture and spoke these words: 'Wait 
and hope. Hope returns with the light and the prophecy. Be watchful of the boundless waters, 
there you shall behold the messenger of good tidings.' 

 

Buyvid Backhuysen 

Walks On Trails And Places Of Magic 


 This book is nonsense from beginning to end. The ruins at Lake Tarn Mira have been 
widely studied. They are not magic, contrary to the statements of B. Backhuysen, and 
therefore cannot be the remains of the legendary Tower of the Swallow. 

Ars Magica, Ed. XIV 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


