CHAPTER FIVE 

 

 

'What does a witcher want in my area?' repeated Fulk Artevelde, the governor of 
Riedbrune, already visibly impatient with the continuing silence. 'Where does the witcher 
come from? What is he looking for? For what purpose?' 

Thus ends the pleasure received from doing good deeds, thought Geralt as he stared at the 
face of the governor, thickened with scars. It ends when you play the merciful, noble witcher 
for a mob of filthy hillbillies. Thus the desire for luxury leads to a spending the night in an 
inn, where there is always a spy. These are the consequences of travelling with a gossip-
addicted poet. So now I'm sitting in a cell reminiscent of a room without windows, on a hard 
chair, which is mounted to the floor for interrogation, and I cannot help but notice that there 
are brackets and straps on the back of this chair. To tie the hands and secure the neck. For 
now, they aren't being used. But they are there. 

And how the devil am I going to wriggle out of this predicament? 

 

*** 

 

When they finally emerged from the drenched wilderness after five days of travelling with 
the bee keeper from the river country, it stopped raining – the wind blew apart the fog and the 
damp mist. The sun broke through the clouds and snow-white mountain peaks sparkled in the 
sunlight. 

Not long ago, the Yaruga River had felt like a significant turning point, a boundary 
beyond which was the obvious transition to the next, more serious stage of the expedition. 
They felt it even more so now that they were approaching a limit, a barrier, a place from 
which retreat seemed their only option. Everyone felt it, especially Geralt. It could not be 
helped, because from morning to night the mighty, jagged, snow and glacier covered 
mountains flashed before them to the south, blocking their way. The Amell Mountains. 
Above the unforgiving mountain range rose the majestic, threatening shape of the Gorgon – 
the Devil's Mountain. It towered above the sawtoothed contour of the Amell Range like the 
blade of a sharp edged obelisk. They did not talk about it, did not discuss it, but Geralt knew 
everyone was thinking about it. For when he looked at the Amell Range and the Gorgon, it 
occurred to him that the idea of marching further south was pure madness. 

Luckily it suddenly turned out they had no further need to travel south. 

The news was brought to them by the shaggy-haired bee keeper. The leader of their trek 
through the wilderness, for whom they had been acting as armed escorts for the last five days. 


The husband and father of the beautiful hamadryads, in whose company he looked like a wild 
boar alongside mares. The liar who had tried to convince them that the Druids had migrated 
to the North Case. 

It happened one day after their arrival in the small town of Riedbrune, the destination of 
bee keepers and trappers of the river country, which was as busy as an anthill. It happened 
one day after they had taken their leave of the bee keeper, who no longer needed the witcher, 
and whom the witcher therefore never expected to see again. All the greater was his 
astonishment. 

The bee keeper began by thanking Geralt wordily and handing him a small bag, full of 
money, to pay his witcher's fees. He accepted, feeling the slightly mocking glances of Regis 
and Cahir. More than once during the march he had complained to them of human 
ingratitude, emphasizing how futile and foolish objective altruism was. 

And then the excited bee keeper finally told them his news:'So, the mistletoe cutters, that 
is, the Druids, sir witcher, are sitting in the oak woods on the lake, Loc Monduirn, which is 
located about thirty-five miles west of here.' 

The bee keeper had heard the news while trading honey and wax with a relative, and the 
relative in turn had heard it from an acquaintance, a diamond hunter. When the bee keeper 
learned that the Druids were nearby, he came running to tell. And now he was beaming with 
the contentment, pride, and importance that any liar has when their lie proves to be true by 
chance. 

Geralt had originally planned to strike out immediately for Loc Monduirn, but his 
companions protested vigorously. Regis and Cahir argued that they should use the money 
from the bee keeper to replenish their supplies and equipment in the city. Milva added that 
they should buy some arrows, because they constantly needed to hunt game and she didn't 
intend to shoot with sharpened sticks. Dandelion wanted to spend at least one night sleeping 
in a bed in an inn, where he could bathe and enjoy a nice beer before bedtime. 

The Druids, everyone told Geralt, would not run away. 

'Although it is pure coincidence,' said the vampire Regis with a strange smile, 'Our team 
is definitely on the right track and absolutely headed in the right direction. Therefore, it is 
apparent that we are inevitably destined to encounter the Druids. A delay of a day or two will 
play no role.' 

'Haste, however,' he remarked philosophically, 'gives the impression that time is terribly 
short. It should usually imply an alarm signal that suggests that one should slow down and 
consider their path reasonably.' 

Geralt did not argue or contradict the philosophy of the vampire, although the nightmares 
that haunted him at night reminded to hurry. Even though he was unable to remember the 
content of these dreams after waking. 


It was the seventeenth of September, the full moon. Six days before the autumn equinox. 

 

*** 

 

Milva, Regis, and Cahir were in charge of making purchases and replenishing their 
equipment. Geralt and Dandelion, in contrast, went out to get more news from the residents 
of Riedbrune. 

Riedbrune was situated in a bend of the Newi River. It was a small town if you only 
counted the brick and wooden buildings that were within the ring of palisade-crowned 
earthworks. But no more than one-tenth of the population lived in the city centre, in the 
buildings that were enclosed by the ramparts. Meanwhile, nine-tenths lived in the noisy sea of 
huts, cottages, booths, sheds, tents, and caravans outside of the city. 

Cicerone, the bee keeper's relative, guided the witcher and the poet. He was a young, 
grated, and arrogant man – a typical specimen of an urban street rat, who was born in the 
gutter, bathed in the gutter, and had satisfied his thirst in the gutter many times. He was like a 
trout in a crystal clear mountain stream as he led them through the noise, crowds, dirt, and 
stench of the city. The opportunity to guide someone through his repulsive city clearly 
pleased him. Ignoring the fact that no one asked him, he enthusiastically passed on his street 
boy's knowledge. He explained that Riedbrune was an important milestone for the 
Nilfgaardian settlers who moved north to get to the promised land-lots from the Emperor: 
four hides, or about fifty acres. And a ten year tax exemption. This was because Riedbrune 
lay at the mouth of the Dol Newi Valley, along the Theodula Pass that cut through the North 
Case of the Amell Mountains, and next to Riverdell, which associated with countries that had 
long been Nilfgaardian subjects – Mag Turga, Geso, Metinna, and Maecht. The town of 
Riedbrune, he explained, was the last city in which the settlers could still rely on something 
more than themselves, their wives and whatever they had in their wagons. That was why the 
majority of the settlers camped before the city quite a long time, catching their breath before 
that last leg of the journey – the Yaruga and beyond. And many of them, he said with gutter-
patriotism and pride, settled permanently in the city, because the city, oho, was cultured and 
was not some kind of a fetid backwater that smelled of manure. 

The town of Riedbrune stank vigorously of many things, including manure. 

Geralt had been here once, years ago, but he didn't recognize it now. Too much had 
changed. Previously there were not as many troopers in black coats and armour, with silver 
emblems on their epaulets. Previously the Nilfgaardian language was not always heard. 
Previously there had been no quarry in the city, filled with ragged, dirty, emaciated, and 
bloodstained men who pounded on rectangular stone blocks and were whipped by black 
clothed guards. 

Their guide told them that there were many Nilfgaardian soldiers stationed here, but not 


for long – they were only taking a break before they marched out to hunt the guerrillas of the 
organization called the 'Free North Case'. The Nilfgaardians needed more workers because 
they planned to replace the old, wooden mounting with a large, brick fortress made from the 
great stones of the quarry. And those stones were mined by prisoners of war. From Lyria and 
Aedirn, from the areas formerly known as Sodden, Bruges, and Angren, and from Temeria. 
There were about four hundred prisoners at work here in Riedbrune. A good five hundred 
worked in the mines and surface mines in the area of Belhaven, and over a thousand built 
bridges and a smooth road through the Theodula Pass. 

There had been a scaffold in the town's marketplace last time Geralt had been here, but it 
had been much more modest. It had not aroused disgusting associations and had not had so 
many devices as the new gallows – stakes, forks and bars. It had not been hung with so many 
stinking, disgusting, and rotting decorations. 

When they came into view of the scaffold, the street boy told them that the recently 
appointed military governor, Lord Fulk Artevelde, was responsible for the fragments of 
human anatomy that adorned it. Because Lord Fulk relied heavily on the executioner. Lord 
Fulk was not to be trifled with, he added. He was a stern Lord. 

They found the street boy's friend, the diamond hunter, in a tavern. He made a poor 
impression on Geralt. He was in the pale, trembling, half-sober, half-drunk, half real, half 
dream state that a man reaches when he drinks for several days and nights without 
interruption. The witcher's hopes fell. At first, it seemed that the sensational news of the 
Druids nearby location had originated from an ordinary delirium. 

However, the hung-over diamond hunter answered their questions consciously and 
meaningfully. He jokingly parried Dandelion's accusation that he did not look like a diamond 
hunter by saying that, even if he ever had found a diamond, he would still look like this. He 
described the whereabouts of the Druids at the Lake Monduirn concretely and precisely, 
without picturesque decorations and overblown fuss. He allowed himself the question of what 
the travellers wanted with the Druids, and was honoured with contemptuous silence. He 
warned them that to go to the oaks of the Druids was certain death, as the Druids tended to 
catch intruders, lock them away in wicker cages, and then pray and chant incantations while 
they burnt them alive. This baseless rumour and sinister superstition, as it turned out, had 
migrated with the Druids. 

Their conversation was interrupted by nine armed soldiers, dressed in black uniforms with 
epaulets that carried the sign of the sun. 

'Are you,' said the sergeant commanding the troops, while he tapped an oak stick against 
his calf, 'the witcher named Geralt?' 

'Yes,' Geralt replied after a moment's hesitation, 'I am.' 

'Then you want to follow us.' 

'How certain are you that I want that? Am I under arrest?' 


 The soldier stared at him for a seemingly endless moment, without any respect. There 
was no doubt that his eight-man escort gave him the audacity to do so. 

'No,' he said finally. 'You are not under arrest. It has not been commanded to arrest you. 
If it had been commanded, sir, I would have asked you differently. Quite differently.' 

 Geralt adjusted his sword belt rather pointedly. 'And I,' he said coldly, 'would have 
responded differently.' 

'Come, come, gentlemen.' Dandelion decided to intervene, and he put something on his 
face that resembled a politician's smile. 'Why this tone? We are decent people, we should not 
have to fear the government. And yes, we are willing to help the authorities. To the extent 
that the opportunity presents itself, of course. And for this the government owes us, does not 
it, Mr. Military? At least such a little thing as an explanation, or the reason for which it 
intends to restrict our civil freedoms.' 

'It is war, sir,' replied the soldier, not impressed by the flowing speech. 'Freedom, as the 
name suggests, is something for peace. But as for the reason, that will be explained to you by 
the governor. I carry out commands, not discussions.' 

'Where he's right, he's right,' conceded the witcher and winked easily at the troubadour. 
'So lead me to the governor, honourable soldier. You, Dandelion, go back to the others and 
tell them what happened. Do what needs to be done. Regis will know.' 

 

*** 

 

'What does a witcher want on the North Case? What is he doing here?' 

The question was asked by a broad-shouldered, dark-haired man with a scarred face and a 
leather patch over his left eye socket. The sight of this cyclopean face in a dark alley would 
have elicited horror in many. Quite mistakenly, considering that it was the face of Lord Fulk 
Artevelde, the governor of Riedbrune and the senior keeper of law and order throughout the 
region. 

'What is a witcher looking for on the North Case?' repeated the highest-ranking upholder 
of the law throughout the region. 

Geralt sighed, shrugged his shoulders, and faked indifference. 'You know the answer to 
your question, sir. I'm a witcher, hired by the bee keeper from the river country to protect 
them on their march here. And as a witcher, I'm looking to earn money on the North Case, or 
anywhere else. I wander in any direction that I may have clients.' 

'Naturally.' Fulk Artevelde nodded. 'At least according to your story. But you separated 
from the bee keeper two days ago and you are preparing to march further south, in some 


strange company. For what purpose?' 

Geralt did not look away – he focused his scorching gaze on the governor's single eye. 
'Am I under arrest?' 

'No. For now, you are not.' 

'Then I suppose my purpose is to march towards my goal and my private affairs.' 

'I would, however, recommend honesty and openness. If only to prove to that you are not 
guilty of any wrongdoing and the government does not have to fear for its safety from you. I 
will try to repeat the question: What is the goal of your journey, witcher?' 

Geralt hesitated. 'I'm trying to get to the Druids that formerly lived in Angren, but have 
now moved to this area. You could have learned this easily from the bee keeper that I have 
escorted.' 

'Who hired you against the Druids? Did the conservationists perhaps burn one person too 
many in their wicker cages?' 

'Fairy tales, rumours, and superstition, started by strange people. I'm looking for 
information from the Druids, not their blood. But really, Lord Governor, it seems to me that I 
have certainly been open enough to prove I'm not guilty of any wrongdoing.' 

'It's not about your guilt. At least, not just yet. It would, however, please me greatly if our 
conversation were dominated by the sounds of mutual accommodation. Contrary to 
appearances, the purpose of this discussion is to preserve your life and the life of your 
companions, among other things.' 

Geralt did not reply immediately. 'You've made me very curious, sir. Among other 
things. I will certainly listen to your explanations with great interest.' 

'Without a doubt. We will come to these explanations, but gradually. In stages. Have you 
ever, Mr. Witcher, heard of the establishment a witness? Do you know what that is?' 

'I know. Someone who wants to evade their responsibility after squealing on the miners.' 

'An over-simplification,' Fulk Artevelde said without a smile, 'in the typical way of the 
Nordlings. You often cover gaps in your education with sarcastic caricature and 
simplification, which you find funny. The law of the Empire applies here on the North Case, 
Mr. Witcher. More precisely, the law of the Empire applies here until the prevailing 
lawlessness is eradicated – root and branch. The best way to stamp out lawlessness and 
banditry is the scaffold, which you've certainly seen in the marketplace. But sometimes, it is 
also the establishment of witnesses.' 

He paused for effect. Geralt did not interrupt. 

'Not long ago,' said the governor, 'we managed to lure a gang of young criminals into an 
ambush. The bandits resisted and were killed...' 


'But not all?' guessed Geralt without further ado, becoming a little bored with all the 
eloquence. 'You've taken one alive. He was promised a pardon if he will testify as a witness. 
That is, if he accuses someone. And he accused me.' 

'What makes you say that? Have you had any contact with the local criminal underworld? 
Now or earlier?' 

'No. I have not. Neither now nor earlier. Therefore forgive me, Lord Governor, but this 
whole affair is either a total misunderstanding or a fraud. Or a provocation directed against 
me. In the latter case, I would suggest not wasting any time, but to get to the point.' 

'So you think this is a provocation directed against you,' said the governor as he rubbed 
his brow, which was disfigured by a scar. 'Perhaps, contrary to your earlier claims, you do 
have a reason to fear the law?' 

'No. Instead, I begin to fear that soon the fight against crime here will run rampant, 
without requiring details, and without a lengthy test of whether someone is guilty or innocent. 
But maybe that's just a caricature and simplification, typical for a stupid Nordling. Which 
would explain why said Nordling still does not understand how the governor of Riedbrune is 
going to save his life.' 

Fulk Artevelde studied him for a while in silence. Then he clapped his hands. 'Bring her 
in.' he called to the soldiers. 

Geralt calmed himself down with a couple of breaths, because all of the sudden he had a 
certain idea that caused heart palpitations and increased adrenaline. Shortly afterwards he had 
to take another few breaths, he even had to run his hand under the table and cast a sign to 
calm himself – an unprecedented event. The effect – this was also unprecedented – was zero. 
He was hot. And cold. 

Because the guards had just brought Ciri into the room. 

'Oh, look here,' said Ciri, immediately after being placed in the chair with her hands tied 
behind her back. 'Look what the wind blew in!' 

Artevelde made a brief gesture. One of the guards, a tall guy with the face of a not 
particularly bright lad, casually slapped Ciri so hard that the chair shook. 

'Forgive her, your honour,' the guard said apologetically, and surprisingly gently. 'She's 
young, stupid. Reckless.' 

'Angouleme,' Artevelde said slowly and clearly. 'I promised that I would listen to you. 
But that means that I will listen to you answer to my questions. I remember your antics. If 
you do not listen to me, you will be penalized for it. Do you understand?' 

'Yes, Uncle.' 

A gesture. A slap. The chair wobbled. 


'She's young,' muttered the guard as he rubbed his hand on his hip. 'Reckless...' 

Geralt already saw that it was not Ciri, and could only wonder at his confusion. A thin 
trail of blood ran from the girl's upturned nose. The girl pulled air hard through her nose and 
smiled predatorily. 

'Angouleme,' repeated the governor. 'Do you understand?' 

'Yes, Lord Fulk.' 

'Who is this, Angouleme?' 

The girl drew another deep breath, bowed her head, and stared at Geralt with her wide 
eyes. Nut-brown, not green. Then she shook her straw-blond hair and a dishevelled mop fell 
forward in streaks on her forehead. 

'I've never seen him before.' She licked off the blood that had run onto her lip. 'But I 
know who he is. I've already told you this, Lord Fulk, now you can see that I wasn't lying. He 
is Geralt. He is a witcher. Ten days ago he crossed the Yaruga and he is travelling towards 
Toussaint. Isn't that right, Uncle White Hair?' 

'Young... reckless...,' said the guard quickly and cast a worried look at the governor. 

But Fulk Artevelde only furrowed his brow and shook his head. 'You're going to make 
jokes on the scaffold, Angouleme. Which is fine with me. Who is Geralt travelling with?' 

'I have already told you this also! With a pretty boy named Dandelion, a troubadour who 
has a lute. With a young woman who has dark blond hair, worn in a braid that is cut at the 
neck. I do not know their names. And with a man without a description, his name likewise 
was not described. Altogether there are four.' 

Geralt rested his chin on his fists, looking at the girl with interest. 

Angouleme did not lower her gaze. 'Your eyes,' she said. 'They are so weird!' 

'Go on, go on,' urged the governor. Angouleme frowned. 'Who else travels in the 
witcher's company?' 

'No one. I told you, there are four. Have you no ears, uncle?' 

A gesture, a slap, and the blood flowed again. The guard rubbed his hand on his hip and 
remarked on the recklessness of youth. 

'You're lying, Angouleme,' said the governor. 'I ask again, how many are there?' 

'As you wish, Lord Fulk. As you wish. As you like. There are two hundred. Three 
hundred! Six hundred!' 

'Lord Governor!' Geralt yelled quickly and sharply before they could strike her. 'It is 
possible. What she's said is so precise that no one could call her liar, rather incompletely 


informed. But where did she get this information? She even admitted that this is the first time 
in her life that she's seen me. And this is the first time in my life that I've seen her. I can 
assure you of that.' 

'Thank you' – Artevelde looked at him askance -'for helping with the investigation. You 
are a valuable help. When I begin to question you, I hope you will be just as talkative. 
Angouleme, did you hear what the Lord Witcher said? Speak. And do not ask questions.' 

'It was said' – the girl licked the blood away from her runny nose -'that if you notified the 
authorities of planned crime and revealed who was planning it, then you would be pardoned. 
Well, I'm talking, right? I know of a planned crime and I want to prevent it. Hear what I say: 
Nightingale and his Hanse are waiting in Belhaven to make cold this witcher and his 
company. The contract was given to them by a half-elf, a stranger – the devil knows from 
where, nobody knows him. All this half-elf told us was: who, how he looks, how he would 
arrive, where he would leave from, and in what kind of company. He warned that he was a 
witcher – not some wimp, but a clever fellow, that they should not play the hero, but stab him 
in the back, shoot him with a crossbow, or if possible poison him if he eats or drinks in 
Belhaven. The half-elf gave Nightingale money Nightingale. A lot of money. And he 
promised more after completion.' 

'After completion,' said Fulk Artevelde. 'So this half-elf is still in Belhaven? With 
Nightingale and his gang?' 

'Maybe. I don't know. It's been over two weeks since I ran away from Nightingale's 
Hanse.' 

'That would be the reason why you're blowing the whistle on him?' The witcher smiled. 
'Personal accounts?' 

The girl's eyes narrowed and her swollen lips twisted repugnantly. 'Fuck you and my 
accounts, Uncle! By blowing the whistle, I'm saving your life, right? You might thank me!' 

'Thank you.' Geralt said before they could beat her. 'I just wanted to say that when it 
comes to accounts, your credibility sinks, crown-witness. People tell on others to save their 
skin and their lives, but when they want revenge they lie.' 

'Our Angouleme has no chance to save her life,' Fulk Artevelde interrupted. 'But she can 
save her skin if she wants to. For me, this is an absolutely credible motive. What Angouleme? 
You want to save your skin, don't you?' 

The girl pursed lips. And paled visibly. 

'Bandits,' said the governor with contempt 'have the courage of a chicken. They have the 
courage to attack and rob the weak, and to kill the defenceless, yes. But to look death in the 
eye, that they cannot do.' 

'We shall see,' she growled. 


'We shall see,' agreed Fulk seriously. 'And hear. You will scream your lungs out on the 
scaffold, Angouleme.' 

'Your grace, you promised.' 

'And I keep my promises. If what you have confessed proves to be true.' 

 Angouleme jerked around on the chair. Her whole slender body seemed to point to 
Geralt. 'And,' she shrieked, 'what's that? Not the truth? Let him deny that he is Geralt the 
witcher! Tell me that I am not credible! I could have let him ride to Belhaven, because then 
there would be proof that I'm not lying! You would have found his body in the gutter. Except 
that then you would say I had not prevented the crime and had no mercy! Yes? You damned 
tricksters! Nothing but swindlers!' 

'Do not beat her,' said Geralt. 'Please.' 

There was something in his voice that stopped the half-raised hands of the governor and 
the guard. 

Angouleme lifted her nose in the air and looked at him intently. 'Thank you, Uncle,' she 
said. 'But beatings are nothing, if they want to hit me. I've been beaten from an early age, I'm 
used to it. If you want to be kind, then confirm that I am telling the truth. So they keep their 
word. Hang me, damn it!' 

'Take her away,' Fulk ordered and gestured for Geralt, who wanted to protest, to be silent. 

'We do not need her anymore,' he said when they were alone. 'I know everything and 
will give you explanations. And then I will ask for reciprocity.' 

'First' – the witcher's voice was cold -'explain what that noisy finale was about. And why 
it ended with the odd request to be hanged. As a crown-witness, the girl has done her part.' 

'Not yet.' 

'How?' 

'Homer Straggen, called the Nightingale, is an exceedingly dangerous criminal. Cruel and 
bold, crafty, lucky, and not stupid. The fact that he gets away with impunity incites others. I 
must put an end to it. That's why I got involved in an agreement with Angouleme. I promised 
that if, as a result of her confession, Nightingale and his gang were taken and broken, we 
would hang Angouleme.' 

'I'm sorry?' The witcher said in amazement. 'So this is the establishment of a witness? 
Cooperation with the authorities gets you – the noose? And what do you get for refusal to 
cooperate?' 

'The stake. Preceded by tearing out the eyes and the breasts with hot pincers.' 

The witcher did not say a word. 


'That is called a deterrent,' Fulk Artevelde went on after a while. 'Absolutely essential in 
the fight with the banditry. What do you clench your fists so hard that I can almost hear the 
knuckles cracking? Are you perhaps a supporter of the humane killing? You can afford you 
this luxury, because you mainly fight against beings who may, as ridiculous as it may sound, 
kill humanely. I cannot afford such a luxury. I've seen merchant caravans and houses that 
were robbed by Nightingale and his ilk. I've seen what they did to men to make them reveal 
their magic keywords and tell where they hid caskets and coffers. I've seen women slit open 
if have failed to satisfy Nightingale or had no hidden valuables. I've seen people who have 
had worse done to them, only so that the robbers could have their fun. Angouleme, whose 
fate moved you so, has committed these kind of jokes, that's for sure. She was in the gang 
long enough. And if the pure coincidence that she's run away from the gang had not come to 
pass, no one would have heard of the ambush in Belhaven and you would have met her 
otherwise. Perhaps it would have been her that shot you in the back with a crossbow.' 

'I don't like what-ifs. Do you know why she fled from the gang?' 

'I confess I am vague on this issue, and neither did my people get bogged down with it. 
But everyone knows that Nightingale is a man who, I would say naturally, reduces women to 
their primary role. If he could not otherwise succeed in persuading the woman to the role, he 
would force her using violence. In addition, generational conflicts have certainly developed. 
Nightingale is a mature man, but the rest of his cronies are greenhorns like Angouleme. But 
that is all speculation, basically I don't care. And I allow myself to wonder why you care? 
Why did the sight of Angouleme wake such vivid emotions in you?' 

'A strange question. The girl reported an attack on me, the plan of her former cronies on 
behalf of a half-elf. This is sensational in itself, because I have no quarrel with any half-elves. 
The girl also knows who I am travelling with. Including details such as the troubadour is 
called Dandelion and the woman has a truncated braid. It's because of these details that I 
guess it is all a lie or a provocation. It wouldn't be difficult for someone to grab and question 
the bee keeper, with whom I was travelling last week. And then you stage this...' 

'Enough!' Artevelde slammed his fist on the table. 'You've got too much at stake here, 
witcher. So I am staging something here? And for what purpose? In order to deceive you, to 
lure you with a yarn? And who are you then, that you have such fear of a provocation? Only 
the criminals burn their hats, Mr. Witcher. Only the criminals!' 

'Give me another explanation.' 

'No, you give one to me.' 

'I'm sorry. I have none.' 

'I could make something up.' The governor smiled wickedly. 'But why? Let's set the 
record straight. It does not interest me who wants to see you dead and why. I do not care why 
that someone has such excellent information about you, down to the colour and length of 
your hair. Moreover: I didn't need to tell you anything about the attack, witcher. I could have 
left your company in peace and then used you to bait the unsuspecting Nightingale. Watching 


you, waiting until Nightingale set his hook and you swallowed the string, weight and float. 
And then I could have taken him. Because it is him I am interested in. If you had to die for 
me to take him? Ha, a necessary evil, worth the cost!' 

He stopped. Geralt made no comment. 

'You should know, sir witcher,' the governor continued after a short pause, 'that I've 
promised myself that the law will prevail in this region. At any cost and by any means, per 
fas et nefas. Because the law is not the jurisprudence, not a thick book full of paragraphs of 
philosophical treatises, no drivelling fantasies of justice, no hackneyed phrases of morality 
and ethics. The law is safe highways and roads. You can walk safely through the streets in 
this city, even after dark. You can go to the lavatory in the inns and taverns and leave your 
purse and wife at the table. The law is the quiet sleep of people who are sure that they will be 
awakened by crowing of the cock, not the red rooster! And for those who break the law – the 
rope, the hatchet, and the red-hot iron! A punishment that deters others. Those who break the 
law have to take their punishment. With all available means and methods... Hey, witcher! I 
can see disapproval painted on your face; do you dislike my methods or their targets? I think 
the methods! Because the methods are easy to criticize, but do you want to live in a safe 
world or not? Well, answer!' 

'I have nothing to say.' 

'I think you do.' 

'I, Lord Fulk,' said Geralt calmly, 'even like the world you're envisioning and 
imagining.' 

'Really? Your face is evidence of something else.' 

'The world in your imagination is the perfect world for a witcher. It will never lack work 
for a witcher. Instead of law books, paragraphs, and drivelling fantasies of justice, your world 
brings lawlessness, anarchy, despotism, the selfishness of petty kings and autocrats, the 
overzealousness of careerists who wish to win favour with their superiors, the blind 
vengeance of fanatics, the cruelty of vigilante justice, and revenge, sadistic revenge. Your 
vision is a world of fear, where people fear to leave their houses after dark – not for fear of 
bandits, but of the guardians of the law, because large scale bandit hunts always lead to the 
fact that the bandits join the ranks of law enforcement en bloc. Your vision is a world of 
bribery and the provocation of the press, a world of witnesses and false witnesses. A world of 
spying and forced confessions. Denunciation and fear of denunciation. And inevitably the day 
will come in your world when the wrong person has their breast torn out with pincers, and 
innocent people will be hanged or impaled. And then it will be a world of crime. In short,' he 
concluded, 'a world in which a witcher would feel like a fish in water.' 

'Please,' said Fulk Artevelde after a pause, as he rubbed the eye socket hidden by his 
leather eye patch. 'An idealist! A witcher. A professional who regularly kills. And yet an 
idealist. And a moralist. That's dangerous in your profession, witcher. It's a sign that you've 
gradually grown out of your profession. One day you'll wonder if you should slay a Striga – 


because maybe it is an innocent Striga? Perhaps my world has blind fanaticism and 
vengeance? I hope it does not get that far. But... I hope it does not, but it is indeed possible. If 
someone would violate a person close to you in a cruel and sadistic manner, then I would like 
to return to this conversation and the issue of appropriate penalties. Who knows, maybe our 
views wouldn't differ so much? But today, here and now, it is a non-issue that we don't need 
to discuss or consider. Today we are talking about concrete things. And you, witcher, are 
concrete!' 

Geralt slightly raised an eyebrow. 

'Even though you've spoken derisively about my methods and my vision of world order, I 
will use you, my dear witcher, to achieve this vision. I repeat: I have sworn to myself that 
those who break the law to get what they deserve. Every one of them. From the little rogue 
who falsifies the weights on the market, to the man who steals a shipment of bows and arrows 
meant for the army. Robbers, pickpockets, thieves, bandits. The terrorists of the organization 
'Free North Case', who proudly call themselves freedom fighters. And Nightingale. 
Especially Nightingale. Nightingale must get his punishment, the method is irrelevant.' 

'We must act quickly – before the amnesty is proclaimed, when he can sit laughing up his 
sleeve at me... witcher, I've been waiting for months for something that would allow me to 
strike at him pre-emptively. Something that allows me to direct him to ensure that he makes a 
mistake, a crucial error that will be his undoing. Must I continue to talk, or have you 
guessed?' 

'I've guessed, but continue talking.' 

'This mysterious half-elf, who appears to be the initiator and instigator of the attack, has 
warned Nightingale of the witcher, has recommended caution, has advised against 
complacency, arrogance, and swagger. I know that he had reasons to give those warnings. 
But the warnings will do no good. Nightingale is making a mistake. He will attack a witcher 
who is forewarned and ready to defend himself. He will attack a witcher who has been 
awaiting his attack. And that will be the end of the bandit Nightingale. I'll make an 
agreement with you, Geralt. You will be my crown-witcher. Do not interrupt me. The 
agreement is simple, each page covers an obligation, each holds its own commitment. You 
must prioritize Nightingale. For my part...' 

He fell silent for a moment, smiling slyly. 

'I will not ask who you are, where you come from, or where and why you are travelling. I 
will not ask why you speak Nilfgaardian with a barely perceptible accent or why dogs and 
horses sometimes shy away from you. I will let the troubadour Dandelion keep his tube filled 
with records. And I will not inform the Imperial Intelligence Service about you until 
Nightingale is dead or sits in jail with me. Perhaps even later, what's the rush? I'll give you 
time. And an opportunity.' 

An opportunity for what?' 


'To get to Toussaint. That ridiculous, fairy tale principality, whose boundaries even the 
Nilfgaardian Intelligence Service will not dare violate. Afterwards, many things can change. 
There will be an amnesty. Perhaps the expansion of the Yaruga will stop. Perhaps even a 
lasting peace.' 

The witcher was silent for a long time. The disfigured face of the governor remained 
motionless, but his eyes sparkled. 

'Agreed,' the witcher said. 

'Without terms? Without conditions?' 

'With two of them.' 

'Yes of course. I'm listening.' 

'First, I must spend a few days riding to the west. To Loc Monduirn. To the Druids, 
because...' 

'Do you think I'm a fool?' Fulk Artevelde violently interrupted. 'Trying to dupe me? To 
the west? Everyone knows where your path leads! Including Nightingale, who set his ambush 
along the way. To the south, to Belhaven, at the point where the Newi crosses the Sansretour 
Valley, leading to Toussaint.' 

'You mean...' 

'... that the Druids are not at Loc Monduirn. For nearly a month. They've travelled 
through the Sansretour Valley to Toussaint, under the wing of the Princess Anarietta of 
Beauclair, who has a soft spot for all sorts of eccentrics, cranks, and fabulous creatures. Such 
people are willingly granted asylum in her little fairyland. You know that, witcher. Do not 
hold me a fool. Do not attempt to dupe me!' 

'I'm not trying to' Geralt said slowly. 'I give you my word that I am not. Tomorrow I 
depart for Belhaven.' 

'Haven't you forgotten something?' 

'No, I have not. My second condition: I want Angouleme. I prefer an amnesty for her that 
releases her from prison. Your crown-witcher needs your crown-witness. Quickly, do you are 
agree or not?' 

'Agreed,' replied Fulk Artevelde almost instantly. 'I have no choice. Angouleme is yours. 
I know that she is the only reason you are with me.' 

 

*** 

 


The vampire rode side by side with Geralt. He listened attentively and did not interrupt. 
The witcher was not mistaken in his perspicacity. 

'We are five, not four,' he quickly summarized after Geralt had finished his story. 'We 
have been five since the end of August, and five crossed the Yaruga. Milva only cut off her 
braid in the river country. Only one week ago. Your blond protégé knew of Milva's cut braid. 
But did not count five. Strange.' 

'Is this the strangest thing about the whole story?' 

'Not at all. The strangest thing is Belhaven. The town the ambush was laid in. A town that 
lies far in the mountains, through the Newi Valley and the Theodula Pass...' 

'Where we never wanted to ride,' concluded the witcher, spurring Roach, who had begun 
to lag behind. 'Three weeks ago, when the half-elf ordered the bandit Nightingale to 
assassinate me, we were still in Angren, wanting to reach Caed Dhu and fearing the Ysgith 
swamps. We didn't even know that we would have to cross the Yaruga. Hell, this morning 
we still did not know that...' 

'We knew,' interrupted the vampire. 'We knew we were looking for the Druids. Both this 
morning and three weeks ago. This mysterious half-elf organized an ambush on the road that 
leads to the Druids, confident that we will take just this path. He just knows...' 

'...better than we do where that path leads.' The witcher retaliated against Regis' earlier 
interruption. 'How does he know?' 

'That, you will have to ask him. That is why you accepted the governor's offer, is not it?' 

'Of course. I reckon that I'll have a little talk with this gentleman, with this half-elf.' 
Geralt smiled distastefully. 'However, even without that, isn't the explanation obvious? That 
he's not working alone?' 

The vampire studied him for a while in silence. 

'I do not like what you are saying, Geralt,' he said finally. 'I do not like what you are 
thinking. That is an ugly thought. It is premature and does not take everything into 
consideration. The result of prejudice and resentment.' 

'Then explain how...' 

'Anyway.' Regis interrupted in a tone that Geralt had never heard from him before. 
'Anyway, that is not the only explanation. For example, have you considered the possibility 
that your blond protégé is simply lying?' 

'Well, well, Uncle,' cried Angouleme, who was riding behind them on the mule named 
Draakula. 'Don't make any accusations before you can prove them!' 

'I'm not your uncle, my dear.' 


'And I'm not your dear, Uncle!' 

'Angouleme' – the witcher turned in his saddle -'be quiet.' 

'As you wish.' Angouleme calmed down instantly. 'You can order me. You brought me 
out of jail and tore me from the clutches of Lord Fulk. You are now the leader of my 
Hanse...' 

'Be quiet, please.' 

Angouleme muttered something to herself, stopped spurring Draakula, and fell back, 
because Geralt and Regis increased their pace and overtook Dandelion, Milva, and Cahir, 
who rode ahead them. They rode towards the mountains, along the banks of the Newi River, 
whose waters were cloudy yellow-brown after the recent rains, and streaked across stones and 
swells. They were not alone. Quite often they encountered Nilfgaardian squadrons, individual 
riders, settler's wagons, and merchant caravans. 

To the south, ever closer and more threatening, rose the Amell Mountains. And the sharp 
needle of Gorgon, the Devil's Mountain, which sank into the clouds that covered the whole 
sky. 

'When will you tell them?' the vampire asked, pointing to the three riding ahead of them. 

'When we make camp.' 

 

*** 

 

Dandelion was the first person to speak after Geralt had finished. 'Correct me if I'm 
wrong,' he said. 'That girl you've willingly and without any conditions accepted into our 
company is a criminal. In order to protect her from punishment – that she deserves by the 
way – you decided to collaborate with the Nilfgaardians. You let them hire you – what am I 
saying, not only yourself, but all of us. We should all help the Nilfgaardians capture and put 
to death any local predators. In short: You, Geralt, have become a Nilfgaardian mercenary, a 
bounty hunter, a hired assassin. And we must play the role of your acolytes... your famuli...' 

'You have an incredible talent for simplifying, Dandelion,' muttered, Cahir. 'Do you 
really not understand what is at stake? Or are you just talking to talk?' 

'Shut up, Nilfgaardian. Geralt?' 

'Let's start' – the witcher threw a twig he had played for a long time into the fire -'with 
the fact that this is my plan and I do not need anyone's help. I can do it alone. Without 
acolytes or famuli.' 

'You've got guts, Uncle,' Angouleme made herself heard. 'But there are twenty-four men, 


also with guts, in Nightingale's Hanse. They will not be easily intimidated – even by a 
witcher. And when it comes to a sword fight, even if everything they say about witchers is 
true, a single man cannot stand against two dozen. You saved my life, so I will repay you in 
kind. By warning you. And helping you.' 

'What the hell – a Hanse?' 

'Aen Hanse,' said Cahir, 'in our language, means an armed crew, but one that is held 
together by friendships...' 

'A secret society?' 

'Something like that. The word, as I've heard it in the local jargon...' 

'A Hanse is a Hanse,' broke in Angouleme. 'Or you could say a gang or a clique. But 
that's not important. What is important is my warning. One person has no chance against a 
whole Hanse. Moreover, Nightingale has many friends and allies in Belhaven and the 
surrounding area. And if you don't know the way, there are several paths that do not lead to 
the city. I tell you: The witcher will not succeed alone. I don't know what customs prevail 
with you, but I will not leave the witcher in the lurch. He accepted me into your company, 
like Uncle Dandelion said, 'willingly and without any conditions', even though I'm a 
criminal... my hair still stinks of prison, because I haven't been able to wash it yet... The 
witcher and no one else brought me out of there. I am grateful to him. Therefore, I will not let 
him down. I will bring him to Belhaven, to Nightingale, and to this half-elf. I will go along 
with him.' 

'I, too,' Cahir said immediately. 

'And I likewise!' Milva said fiercely. 

Dandelion pressed the tube with the manuscripts to his chest. He had not separated from it 
recently, even for a moment. You could tell that he was struggling with his thoughts. And the 
thoughts of what the gains would be. 

'Do not meditate, poet,' Regis said softly. 'There's nothing to be ashamed of. You are 
even less vindicated to participate in a bloody fight of swords and knives than me. We were 
not taught to cripple our neighbours with iron. In addition... I'm also...' he advised the witcher 
and Milva with flashing eyes. 'I'm a coward,' he confessed shortly. 'If I do not have to, I do 
not want to go through something like that time on the barge and the bridge again. Never 
again. And I ask to be exempted from the battle group that goes to Belhaven.' 

'From that barge and bridge,' Milva replied flatly, 'you carried me out on your back when 
my legs were so weak that they buckled. If there would have been a coward in your place, he 
would have fled and left me alone. But there was no coward. There was only you, Regis.' 

'Well said, Aunty,' said Angouleme convinced. 'I don't quite understand what's being 
discussed, but it was well said.' 


'I'm not your aunt!' Milva's eyes sparkled threateningly. 'Watch it, lady! Call me that 
again and you'll see!' 

'What will I see?' 

'Silence!' barked the witcher sharply. 'Enough, Angouleme! I see I need to call all of you 
to order. The time of wandering at random, into the blue, just because there might be 
something in the blue, is gone. It's time for concrete action. Time to cut throats. Because 
finally there is someone's throat that we can cut. Those who have not yet registered should 
understand – at last we have an actual enemy within reach. A half-elf, who wants us dead, an 
agent of our enemy's forces. Thanks to Angouleme, we were warned and identified risk – 
'danger averted', as the saying goes. I need to get this half-elf and squeeze out of him whose 
orders he is acting on. Do you finally understand, Dandelion?' 

'Apparently,' the poet said calmly, 'I understand more and better than you. Without 
covert squeezing I can imagine that that mysterious half-elf is acting on the commands of 
Dijkstra, whose ankle you shattered in front of my eyes on Thanedd. According to the report 
of Marshal Vissegerd, Dijkstra has no doubts that we are Nilfgaardian spies. And after our 
escape from the Lyrian Corps and Queen Meve, a few points are guaranteed to be added to 
our list of crimes...' 

'Wrong, Dandelion,' put Regis softly. 'It is not Dijkstra. Nor Vissegerd. Nor Meve.' 

'Who then?' 

'Any judgment, any conclusion would be premature.' 

True,' said the witcher coldly. 'That case must be examined on the spot. And the 
conclusions can be drawn from the autopsy.' 

'But I,' insisted Dandelion, 'still consider this idea to be stupid and risky. It is fortunate 
that we were warned of the ambush that we know of the half-elf. Now that we know, we can 
take a big detour around it. This elf or half-elf can wait for us while we continue our way 
quickly...' 

'No,' interrupted the witcher. 'That's the end of the discussion, my friend. The end of the 
anarchy. It is time for our... Hanse... to finally get a leader.' 

 

*** 

 

Everyone, except for Angouleme, looked at him expectantly. 

'Myself, Angouleme, and Milva,' he said, 'will ride to Belhaven. Cahir, Regis, and 
Dandelion will turn at the Sansretour Valley and ride to Toussaint.' 


'No,' said Dandelion, quickly and firmly grabbing his tube. 'Not at any price. I cannot...' 

'Shut up. This is not a discussion. That was a command from the leader of this Hanse! 
Ride to Toussaint – you, Regis, and Cahir. Wait for us there.' 

'Toussaint means death to me,' the troubadour said weakly. 'If I am recognized at the 
castle in Beauclair, I'm done. I must reveal to you...' 

'You must not,' the witcher cut him off. 'Too late. You could have pulled back, but you 
didn't want to. You stayed in the company. To save Ciri. Right?' 

'Yes.' 

'So, you will ride through the Sansretour Valley with Regis and Cahir. You will be in the 
mountains waiting for us – do not exceed the borders of Toussaint yet. But when... But if it 
proves necessary, then exceed them. For apparently the Druids from the Caed Dhu are in 
Toussaint. If it proves necessary, you will obtain the information from the Druids and go on 
looking for Ciri... alone.' 

'What do you mean by 'alone'? You can't expect that...' 

'I do not expect, but I am taking every possibility into account. For all cases. It is the last 
resort, if you will. Maybe it will all go well and you won't need to pass into Toussaint. But in 
the other case... It is important because the Nilfgaardians will not pursue you into Toussaint.' 

'True, they won't' added Angouleme. 'It's weird, but Nilfgaard respects the boundaries of 
Toussaint. I hid there from pursuers once. But the knights there are no better than the blacks! 
The talk nobly and politely, but they are quick to use their lances and swords. And they patrol 
the border constantly. They are called 'knights-errant'. They ride alone, in pairs, or in threes. 
And they destroy the rabble. Which is us. Witcher, you should make one change to your 
plans.' 

'What?' 

'If anyone is going to ride Belhaven and to Nightingale, it should be me, you and Lord 
Cahir. And Aunty should ride with the others.' 

'Why?' Geralt calmed Milva with a gesture. 

'Because we need guys for this. What's the matter, Aunt? I know what I'm talking about! 
If we get that far, we might be able to intimidate them rather than using force. And no one in 
Nightingale's Hanse would be afraid of three people when two of them are women.' 

'Milva rides with us.' Geralt's fingers clasped the shoulder of the archer, who was 
furious. 'Milva, not Cahir. I do not want to ride with Cahir.' 

'And why not?' Asked Angouleme and Cahir almost simultaneously. 

'Indeed,' Regis said slowly. 'Why not?' 


'Because I do not trust him,' the witcher said shortly. 

The ensuing silence was awkward, heavy, almost sticky. The sounds of raised voices, 
shouting, and singing, carried over from the forest, where a merchant caravan had camped 
with another group of travellers. 

'Explain that,' Cahir said. 

'Someone's betrayed us,' the witcher said dryly. 'After speaking with the governor and 
hearing Angouleme's information there is no doubt. And if you think about it, you come to 
the conclusion that there is a traitor among us. It's easy to guess who.' 

'It seems to me' – Cahir drew his eyebrows together -'that you are hinting that I am a 
traitor.' 

'I do not hide' – the voice of the witcher was cold -'that the idea occurred to me, anyway. 
There is good evidence. It would explain much. Very much.' 

'Geralt,' said Dandelion. 'Aren't you going a bit too far?' 

'Let him talk.' Cahir pursed his lips. 'Let him talk. Let him do what he wants.' 

'We have all wondered,' – Geralt let his eyes wander over the faces of his companions -
'about the alleged calculation error. You know what I mean. That we were four, not five. We 
thought that someone had simply made a mistake – the mysterious half-elf, or Nightingale, or 
Angouleme. But when one discards the version with the error? Then the next explanation 
arises: The team consists of five people, but Nightingale is only supposed to kill four. 
Because the fifth is the assassin's accomplice. Someone who has constantly informed him 
about the movements of the company. From the beginning, from that moment the company 
was formed after eating the famous fish soup. When it enrolled in its ranks a Nilfgaardian. A 
Nilfgaardian, who wants to bring Ciri into his power so he can pass her to his Emperor 
Emhyr, because his life and future career depend on this...?' 

'So I was not wrong,' Cahir said slowly. 'I am a traitor. A vicious, duplicitous traitor?' 

'Geralt,' Regis rejoined the discussion. 'Forgive my frankness, but your version is as full 
of holes as an old sieve. And your way of thinking, as I've already told you, is ugly.' 

'I am a traitor,' repeated Cahir, as if he had not heard the vampire's words. 'From what I 
understand, however, there is no evidence of my betrayal – there are only the vague 
suspicions and presumptions of this witcher. From what I understand, the burden falls on me 
to prove my innocence. I'll have to prove that I am not a horse. Yes?' 

'Without pathos, Nilfgaardian,' growled Geralt, who stood before Cahir and fixed his 
eyes on him. 'If I had a proof of your guilt, I would waste no time talking, but cut you into 
pieces like a herring! Do you know the principle of Cui Bono? Then tell me: Who else but 
you would have the slightest reason to betray us? Who else but you would benefit from a 
betrayal?' 


There was a loud, sustained roar from the camp of the merchant caravan. The black sky 
exploded with sparkling red and gold stars. The fireworks shot like a swarm of golden bees 
and fell as a colourful rain. 

'I'm not a horse,' said the young Nilfgaardian in a powerful sounding voice. 
'Unfortunately, I cannot prove it. But I can do something else. That which I do when I or 
something that I own is insulted – when my honour and dignity are kicked to the dirt and 
defiled.' 

His motion was lightning fast, but he wasn't fast enough to strike the witcher, at least he 
wouldn't have been if not for the witcher's painful and aggravated knee. Geralt did not 
completely succeeded with his dodge, and the gloved fist hit him on the cheek with such 
force that he fell right back into the fire, sending sparks flying. He jumped up, slowed again 
by the pain in his knee. Cahir was already with him. And this time the witcher was not able to 
dodge him at all. Cahir thundered his fist against the side of his head, and colourful fireworks 
flashed before his eyes, even more beautiful than those of the merchants. Geralt spat a filthy 
curse and threw himself at Cahir, embracing him with his arms and throwing him to the 
ground, where they rolled in the gravel and crashed fists. 

And all the while the sky was exploding with the spooky and unnatural light of artificial 
fire. 

'Stop it!' roared Dandelion. 'Stop it, you are both damned idiots!' 

Cahir struck Geralt, who was trying to get up, and knocked him off his feet again. The 
blow positively boomed. Geralt turned over, pulled up, and kicked him in the hip. Again they 
rolled around, one over the other, beating each other, blinded by the blows just as much as the 
dust and sand in their eyes. 

And suddenly they parted, rolling away in different directions, hands curled above their 
heads to protect themselves against the whistling blows raining down on them. 

Milva had removed the wide leather belt from her hips and wrapped the buckle once 
around her hand. She ran to the fighters and began to beat them with all her strength, sparing 
neither her arm nor the belt. The belt whistled and clapped as it met with hands, shoulders, 
back, or arms – sometime's Cahir's, sometimes Geralt's. When they parted, Milva jumped 
back and forth between them like a grasshopper, still continuing to whip them, one no more 
than the other. 

'You stupid jerks!' She cried, and sent a blow crashing onto Geralt's back. 'You stupid 
jerks! I'll bring you to reason, both of you!' 

'Enough?' She shouted even louder, while Cahir covered his head with one of his hands. 
'Are you ready to act reasonably? Have you calmed down?' 

'Ready!' bellowed the witcher. 'Enough!' 

'Enough,' agreed Cahir, curled up. 'Enough!' 


'It's enough,' said the vampire. 'It really is, Milva.' 

The archer was breathing heavily, rubbing her forehead with the hand that had the belt 
wrapped around it. 

'Bravo,' Angouleme let herself be heard. 'Bravo, Aunty.' 

Milva turned on her heel and swung the belt with full force at her shoulder. Angouleme 
shrieked, fell down, and began to cry. 

'I told you,' Milva came out breathing hard, 'not to call me that again. I told you!' 

'Nothing's happened!' Dandelion somewhat shakily assured the merchants and travellers, 
who had come running from their nearby fires. 'Just a little misunderstanding among friends. 
A difference of opinion among friends. Already settled!' 

The witcher touched a loose tooth with his tongue and spit out the blood that flowed from 
his split lip. He could already feel swollen welts forming on his back and arms. One grew on 
his ear, seemingly the size of a cauliflower. Beside him, Cahir raised himself off the ground, 
quite inelegantly. Cahir held his cheek and swollen welts were visible on his bare. 

A stinking rain of brimstone fell to the ground, the ashes of the last fireworks. 

Angouleme was holding her shoulder and sobbing pitifully. Milva dropped the belt, knelt 
down, and after a brief moment of hesitation silently hugged herself. 

'I suggest' the vampire said coldly, 'that everyone keeps their hands to themselves. I 
suggest we never, absolutely never, come back to this subject.' 

Unexpectedly, a wind began to blow and whistle from the mountains, in which, it seemed, 
played some ghostly screams, cries, and lamentations. The clouds scudding across the sky 
took on fantastic shapes. The moon turned red as blood. 

 

*** 

 

They were awakened before dawn by the furious rush of wings and a choir of goat 
milkers. 

They left just after sunrise, because later the sun would reflect on the snow covered 
mountain tops with blinding bright light. They started long before the sun could show on the 
peaks. And incidentally, the sky was covered with clouds long before that could happen. 

They rode through forests, the road always climbing higher and higher, which was 
noticeable by the change in the trees. Oak and hornbeam suddenly stopped, and in their place 
rose the darkness of beech trees. The ground smelled of mildew and was padded with fallen 
leaves, cobwebs, and fungi. Mushrooms were in abundance. The wet end of the summer had 


produced a veritable flood of fungus. In place, the beech trees almost disappeared under the 
hats of mushrooms, toadstools, and fly agaric. 

The beech woods were quiet; it looked as if most of the birds had moved away. Only the 
caws of crows soaked the edges of the thickets. 

Then listened to the silence, and then suddenly spruce appeared. It started to smell of 
resin. 

More and more, they came upon bare hills and ridges, where the wind pounced on them. 
The Newi River foamed over swells and cascades, and its water became crystal clear despite 
the rain. 

The Gorgon loomed on the horizon. Ever nearer. 

Glaciers and snow flowed down from the jagged edges of the mighty mountain, which 
made the Gorgon look as if it were wrapped in white shawls. The summit of the Devil's 
Mountain was constantly surrounded by clouds, as if they were veiling the head and neck of a 
mysterious bride. Sometimes, however, the Gorgon shook like a dancer in her white dress – a 
beautiful but deadly sight: The avalanches tumbled down the steep mountainsides and swept 
away everything in their path – all the way down to the stone slopes of the mountain base and 
on to the Theodula pass, then through the Newi and Sansretour Valleys, ending in the black 
eyes of the mountain lakes. 

The sun finally emerged the clouds, but it didn't stay for long – soon after it disappeared 
behind the mountains in the west, making the sky glow with purple and gold flames. 

They spent the night. The sun came up. 

And then it was time to separate. 

 

*** 

 

He carefully wriggled Milva's silk scarf around his head. He jammed on Regis' hood. 
Once again, he checked the position of the Sihil on the back and the two stilettos in his boots. 

Nearby, Cahir sharpened his long Nilfgaardian sword. Angouleme wrapped a woollen 
band around her forehead and stuck a hunting knife stuck in her boot – a gift from Milva. The 
archer and Regis saddled their horses. The vampire had left his horse to Angouleme, 
upgrading her from the mule Draakula. 

They were ready. Only one thing remained to be done. 

'Come, all of you.' 

They came. 


'Cahir, son of Ceallach' began Geralt, trying not to sound pathetic. 'I have offended you 
with an unwarranted suspicion and acted maliciously towards you. First, I do hereby 
apologize, head bowed. I do apologize and ask you to forgive me. Also, I ask all of you for 
forgiveness, because it was cruel to make you watch and listen to it all.' 

'I have omitted to Cahir and to you the reason for my anger, my rage, and my grief. They 
stem from the fact that I know who betrayed us. I know who betrayed and kidnapped Ciri, 
who we want to save. My anger stems from the fact that we are talking about a person who 
was once very close to me.' 

'Where we are, what we are doing, which way we go, and what we want – it's all been 
determined by means of detection and acquisition magic. It is not too difficult for a master of 
magic to locate a person from a distance and observe them – as long as that person was once 
well known and close to them. And as long as they had formed a long-lasting mental contact 
with them, making it possible to create their matrix. But the sorcerer and the sorceress of 
whom I speak have made a mistake. They exposed themselves. They were wrong about the 
number of members in the company, and this mistake has betrayed them. Tell them, Regis.' 

'Geralt may be right,' Regis said slowly. 'Like any vampire, I am an invisible magical 
target for detection probing and acquisition spells. One can calculate a vampire with 
analytical magic up close, however it is not possible to discover a vampire from a distance 
with a locating spell. A tracking spell will not show the vampire. Where the vampire is, says 
the acquisition magic that no one had. Only a magician could therefore be mistaken in regard 
to us as follows: to count four, when in truth we are five, that is, four men and a vampire.' 

'We will take advantage of that error and get the magician,' the witcher took the floor 
again. 'Myself, Cahir, and Angouleme will ride to Belhaven and talk with the half-elf, our 
would-be killer. We will not ask the half-elf at whose command he is working, because we 
already know. We will ask him where the magician is. If we can get a location from him, we 
will ride there. And take revenge.' 

All were silent. 

'We've stopped counting the days, so we have not even noticed that already is the twenty-
fifth of September. Two days ago was the equinox. The equinox. Yes, that was the same 
night you think it was. I see your sadness in your eyes. You received a signal, then, in that 
vile night when we camped next to the merchants who brandy made courageous enough to 
sing and launch fireworks. Surely you haven't had a premonition as clearly as Cahir and I, 
but you can imagine, yes. You have a suspicion. And I fear that the suspicion is justified.' 

The crows flew over the treeless rocks and began to croak. 

'Everything indicates that Ciri is no longer alive. Two days ago, on the equinox, she was 
killed. Somewhere far from here – lonely, alone, and among hostile strangers.' 

'We are left with only revenge. A bloody and cruel revenge, about which stories will 
circulate for a hundred years. Such tales that people will be afraid to hear them after dark. 


And those who would like to repeat such a crime will tremble at the thought of our revenge. 
We will give them a shocking example of horror! With the method of Lord Fulk Artevelde, 
the clever Lord Fulk, who knows how to treat criminals with the gallows. We will make a 
deterrent example that will amaze even him!' 

'Let us begin our journey to hell! Cahir, Angouleme: to the horses. We ride along the 
Newi, then we ascend to Belhaven. Dandelion, Milva, Regis: follow the Sansretour to the 
borders of Toussaint. You cannot miss the way, the Gorgon will show you. See you soon.' 

 

*** 

 

Ciri stroked the black tomcat, who had returned to the hut in the swamp. Like all cats, its 
dislike of cold, hunger, and discomfort had eventually overshadowed its love of freedom. 
Now he lay on girl's lap, offering his neck to pet and purring with pleasure. 

The tomcat did not give a damn about the girl's tale. 

'That was the only time that I dreamed of Geralt,' continued Ciri. 'I had not once seen 
him in a dream since the time we parted on the island of Thanedd, since the Tower of Gulls. 
Therefore I thought he was dead. And then he suddenly appeared in this dream, one of the 
dreams Yennefer had long ago taught me were prophetic, precognitive, and showed either the 
past or the future. It was the day before the equinox. In a small town whose name I forget. In 
a basement where Bonhart had locked me up. After he tortured me and forced me to confess 
who I was.' 

'You told him who you were?' Vysogota raised his head. 'You told him everything?' 

'I paid' – she gulped -'for my cowardice with subjugation and self-loathing.' 

'Tell me about this dream.' 

'I saw it as if I were a mountain – tall and steep-edged like a stone knife. I saw Geralt. I 
heard what he said. Exactly. Every word, as I if were there in person. I remember I wanted to 
call out to him and tell him that things were quite different than he thought, that everything 
was not true, that he was terribly misled... that he was mistaken about everything! That it was 
not the equinox yet, and even if it was, that I would not die on the equinox like he previously 
declared, because I was still alive. And that he should not accuse Yennefer and say such 
things about her...' 

She paused for a moment, stoked the cat, and then sniffed violently. 

'But I had no voice. I couldn't even breathe... It was as if I drowning. And then I awoke. 
The last thing I saw, the last thing I remember from this dream were three riders. Geralt and 
two others, galloping through a canyon with cascades falling down its walls...' 


Vysogota was silent. 


*** 

 

If someone managed to sneak through the dark to the hut with the sagging thatch roof, and 
if they had peeked through a crack in the shutters, they would have seen, in the dimly lit 
interior, a gray-bearded old man focusing on listening to the story of an ash-blonde girl an 
ugly scar on her disfigured cheek. 

They would have seen a black cat sitting on the girl's lap, purring lazy, and wanting to be 
petted further – to the delight of the mice passing through the hut. 

But no one could see that. The hut with the bagged and mossy thatch roof was well 
hidden in the mist of the boundless swamps of Pereplut, where no one dared enter. 

 

*** 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


It is known that the witcher inflicts pain, suffering and death. He perversely pleasures and 
delights in such simple feelings like a normal, god-fearing person does with his wife on their 
wedding night. It visibly followeth, that in this sense the witcher is an unnatural creature, a 
contemptible and immoral degenerate, originating from the foulest, darkest depths of hell 
because indeed only the devil can delight in suffering and torment. 

 

Anonymous 

Monstrum, or a Portrayal of Witchers 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


