CHAPTER TWO 

 

 

The west wind ushered in a night-time thunderstorm. 

The purple-black sky cracked with lines of lightning and exploded with persistent rumbles 
of thunder. A downpour began, pelting the dusty road, roofs, and dirt smeared windows with 
drops as thick as oil. The strong wind continued and soon drove the rain and the storm 
somewhere far beyond the lightning blazing horizon. 

And then the dogs started barking. Hooves were drumming, weapons rattling. A wild 
hooting and whistling woke the sleeping villagers, making their hair stand on end. They 
jumped up hastily and locked doors and windows with iron bars. Sweaty hands clutched axes 
and pitchfork handles. They clasped them firmly. And yet helplessly. 

Terror, terror was flying through the village. Hunters or the hunted? Cruel and insane with 
rage or fear? Will they dash through without slowing the horses? Or will the night be 
illuminated with the light of burning thatch and fire? 

Hush, hush, child... 

Mama, are they demons? Is this the Wild Hunt? Spectres from hell? Mama, Mama! 

Peace, peace, children. These are not demons, not devils. 

Worse. 

They are people. 

The dogs barked. A gale was blowing. Horses whinnied and horseshoes pounded. 

Through the village, through the night, to chase the riff-raff. 

 

*** 

 

Hotsporn came riding over the crest of the hill, halted his horse and turned it sideways. He 
was careful, cautious, and did not take any chances, especially not when vigilance cost 
nothing. He was in no hurry to ride down the river, to the post office. He preferred to 
examine it thoroughly first. 

Neither horses nor carriages were at the station, there was only a small wagon, drawn by a 
pair of mules. Writing could be seen on its canvas roof, though Hotsporn could not decipher 
it from the distance. But it did not smell like danger. Hotsporn knew how to sense danger. He 


was a professional. 

He rode on, over the entangled bank covered in scrub and willow bushes, then decided to 
drive his horse into the river. He galloped through, splashing water up over his saddle. The 
ducks on the banks honked loudly and fled. 

Hotsporn drove the horse on and rode into the yard of the station through a gap in the 
fence. Now he could read the writing on the wagon canvas; it said: 'Master Alma Vera, 
Tattoo Artist.' Each word of the inscription was painted a different colour and began with a 
particularly large, richly illuminated letter. The front right wagon wheel was emblazoned 
with a mark: a forked purple arrow. 

'Dismount,' said a voice from behind him. 'Get on the ground, now! Hands off the hilt!' 

They had surrounded him silently – to the right was Asse in a black leather jacket, laced 
with silver threads – to the left was Falka in a green suede jacket, with feathers in her beret. 
Hotsporn pulled down his hood and the scarf covering his face. 

'Ha!' Asse lowered his sword. 'Hotsporn. I would have recognized you, but this black 
horse had me fooled!' 

'That's a beautiful mare,' Falka said enthusiastically, pushing the beret off her ear. 'As 
black and shiny as coal, not a hair lighter. And graceful! Oh, what a beauty!' 

'Well, I got her for just under a hundred florens.' Hotsporn smiled carelessly. 'Where is 
Giselher? Inside?' 

Asse nodded. Falka stared at the mare, spellbound, and patted her neck. 'When she 
galloped through the water' – she looked at Hotsporn with her large green eyes – 'She was 
like the purest Kelpie! If you would have come from the sea instead of the river, I would've 
sworn this was a Kelpie.' 

'Has Miss Falka ever seen a real Kelpie?' 

'Only once, in a picture.' The girl's face suddenly clouded over. 'That would be a long 
story. Go inside. Giselher is waiting.' 

 

*** 

 

Light filtered through the window and shone on a table. On that table sat Mistle, leaning 
back on her elbows and naked from the waist down, clothed in nothing but black stockings. 
Between her shamelessly spread legs knelt a lean, long-haired individual in a gray-brown 
coat. That could be none other than Master Alma Vera, the tattoo artist, because he was just 
about to bite a colourful picture into Mistle's leg. 


'Come closer,' Giselher motioned for Hotsporn to take an empty stool at the table where 
he sat with Spark, Kayleigh, and Reef. The latter two were dressed similarly to Asse in black 
calf leather jackets, which were littered with buckles, rivets, chains and other fanciful 
embellishments of silver. They must have originally belonged to some craftsman, thought 
Hotsporn. If they liked something, the Rats would pay tailors, shoemakers and saddlers truly 
regal fees. Of course, they also simply stole people's clothing or jewellery, if something 
caught their eye. 

'You found our message in the ruins of the old station?' continued Giselher. 'Ha, of 
course you did, otherwise you would not be here, yes. I must admit, you have come quickly.' 

'Because of his beautiful mare,' interjected Falka. 'I bet it is fast!' 

'I found your message.' Hotsporn did not look away from Giselher. 'But what about 
mine? Has it reached you?' 

'Has it...' the leader of the Rats began to hum and haw. 'But... Well, in short... We haven't 
had time. First, we got drunk and had to cut back for a while. And later, we had to go 
somewhere else...' 

Damn bastards, thought Hotsporn. 

'In short, you have not executed the order?' 

'N-no. Excuse me, Hotsporn. It did not fit... But next time, oho! Absolutely!' 

'Absolutely!' Kayleigh emphatically confirmed, although no one had asked him for a 
confirmation. 

Damn, irresponsible bastards. You got drunk. And then you had to go elsewhere. 
Elsewhere being where you found those unusual clothes, no doubt. 

'Will you have a drink with us?' 

'No thank you.' 

'Or perhaps some of this?' Giselher pointed to an ornate paint jar that stood between the 
jugs and tankards. Hotsporn now knew whence came the strange glint in the eyes of the Rats 
and why their movements were so nervous and fast. 

'First-class dust,' assured Giselher. 'Will you take a pinch?' 

'No thank you.' Hotsporn cast an eloquent glance at a blood stain and a vanishing trail in 
the sawdust, which revealed the path a corpse had been dragged. Giselher noticed the look. 

'That marks the death of the postmaster's servant, who wanted to act like a hero,' he 
snarled. 'Until Spark made an example of him.' 

Spark let out a throaty laugh. You could see immediately that she was exhilarated by the 
powerful narcotic. 'I made an example of him, only so that blood gushed,' she boasted. 'And 


immediately after the others stayed peaceful. This is called terrorism!' 

As usual, she was draped with jewellery – she even had a small diamond ring in her 
nostrils. She wore no leather, but instead a cherry-red brocade jacket with a pattern that was 
already becoming the latest fashion among wealthy youths. The same was true with the silk 
cloth wrapped around the head of Giselher. Hotsporn had even heard of girls who cut their 
hair like Mistle's. 

'That is called terrorism,' he repeated thoughtfully, still staring at the trail of blood on the 
floor. 'And the postmaster? His wife? Their son?' 

'No, no.' Giselher frowned. 'Do you think we slaughter everyone? Where did you get that 
idea? We have temporarily locked them in the pantry. The station, as you can see, belongs to 
us now.' 

Kayleigh noisily flushed his mouth with wine and spat on the floor. Using a spoon, he 
took a pinch from the casket of Fisstech, licked the tip of his index finger, sprinkled it on 
carefully, and rubbed the anaesthetic into his gums. He gave the jar to Falka, who repeated 
the ritual and passed it to Reef. The Nilfgaardian, who was busy trying to look through a 
catalogue of coloured tattoos, refused and gave the jar to Spark. The elf passed it on to 
Giselher, without making use of it. 

'Terror,' hissed Spark, narrowing her glinting eyes and sniffling. 'With its help we 
conquered this station! Emperor Emhyr does it to the entire world, we only to this hovel. But 
the principle is the same!' 

'Owww, dammit!' cried Mistle from the table. 'Watch where you poke that thing! Do that 
again and I'll stab you! Straight through!' 

The Rats – except Falka and Giselher – roared with laughter. 

'If you want to be beautiful, you have to suffer!' called Spark. 

'Don't worry, master,' added Kayleigh. 'Between the legs is inured to you!' 

Falka threw a filthy curse at him, followed by a tankard. Kayleigh ducked and again the 
Rats laughed loudly. 

Hotsporn decided to put an end to the mirth. 'So the station is in terror. And for what? 
Apart from the satisfaction of terrorizing people?' 

'We are here in ambush', said Giselher while he rubbed Fisstech into his gums. 'If 
someone comes here to change horses or to take a rest, we take them out. This brings in more 
than any crossroads in the wild or fork on the road. But, like Spark has just said, the principle 
is the same.' 

'But we've been here the whole day today and all we got was this', said Reef while he 
pointed to Master Alma Vera, whose whole head had nearly disappeared between Mistle's 


splayed thighs. 'A pauper like all artists. He has nothing to steal, so we rob him of his art. 
Take a look at how clever he is at drawing.' 

He bared his arm and showed a tattoo – a naked woman, who moved her buttocks when 
he clenched his fist. Kayleigh also had one – twisted around his arm, above the spiked 
bracelet, was a green snake with its mouth open and a scarlet red forked tongue. 

'Very tasteful' Hotsporn said with indifference in his voice. 'And helpful in the 
identification of corpses. But the robbery went wrong, dear Rats. You will have to pay the 
artist for his art. There was no opportunity to warn you: For seven days, since the first of 
September, the sign of safe passage has been a purple forked arrow. The same sign that is 
painted on his wagon.' 

Reef swore softly and Kayleigh began to laugh. Giselher waved indifferently. 

'Oh well. If need be, he will be paid for his needles and inks. A purple arrow, you say? 
We will remember. If somebody comes up tomorrow with the character of the arrow, nothing 
will happen to him.' 

'You're going to stay here tomorrow?' Hotsporn was surprised and a bit incredulous. 
'Foolish, you Rats. Risky and dangerous!' 

'How?' 

'Risky and dangerous.' 

Giselher shrugged his shoulders. Spark spluttered and spit on the floor. Reef, Kayleigh 
and Falka looked at the Hotsporn as if he had just informed them that the sun had fallen into 
the river and they had to fish it out quickly before it was cut to pieces by crab claws. 
Hotsporn realized that he had just appealed to reason of crazy brats. That the people he was 
warning of risk and danger were braggarts filled with insane bravado – people who were not 
familiar with the concepts of risk or danger. 

'You are being hunted, Rats.' 

'So what?' 

The discussion was interrupted by Mistle, who approached them, without taking the 
trouble to get dressed. She put one foot on the bench, turned her hips and showed the world 
the work of Master Alma Vera: a fiery red rose on a green stem with two leaves, situated 
directly on the leg near the groin. 

'Well?' she asked and put her hands on her hips. Diamonds sparkled on her many 
bracelets, which covered her arms almost to her elbows. 'What say you?' 

'One thing is prettier than the other!' Kayleigh snorted and brushed back his hair. 
Hotsporn noticed that the Rat's ears were pierced and he wore small rings in them. Doubtless, 
before long such rings – as well as metal studded leather jacket – would be the latest fashion 


among the wealthy youth throughout Thum and Geso. 

'Your turn, Falka' said Mistle. 'What do you want to make you stand out?' 

Falka touched her legs, leaned down and looked at the tattoo. Up close. Mistle tousled her 
ash-blond hair tenderly. Falka began to giggle and undress without ceremony. 

'I want a rose,' she said. 'In the very same place as yours, darling.' 

 

*** 

 

'I think you might have mice, Vysogota.' Ciri interrupted her story and looked at the 
floor, where the light from the small lamp illuminated a true tournament of mice. One could 
only imagine what was going on outside the glow of the lamp, in the dark. 

'You could use a cat. Or better still, two cats.' 

'The rodents' – the hermit cleared his throat – 'come to the hut because winter is coming. 
And I have a cat. But it's gone off somewhere, the faithless...' 

'It must have been bitten by a fox or a raccoon.' 

'You have not seen this cat, Ciri. If he has been bitten by anything, it would be a dragon. 
Nothing smaller.' 

'So it was a tomcat? Ha, too bad. He would not allow these mice to crawl into bed with 
me. Too bad.' 

'Too bad. But I think he will come back. He always comes back.' 

'I'll put some wood on the fire. It's cold.' 

'Cold. The nights are devilishly cold now... and it's not even mid-October... Go on, Ciri.' 

Ciri sat motionless for a moment, gazing into the fire pit. The fire rose around the newly 
placed log. It began to crackle and hiss. It threw a golden glow and darting shadows on the 
disfigured face of the girl. 

'Tell.' 

 

*** 

 

Master Alma Vera stabbed and Ciri could feel tears gathering in the corners of her eyes. 


Although she had prepared herself with wine and the white powder, the pain was unbearable. 
She had to grit her teeth to stifle her moans. But of course, she did not moan. She acted as if 
she didn't even notice the needles and didn't give a damn about the pain. She tried to continue 
as if nothing were happening, to participate in the conversation the Rats were having with 
Hotsporn. He was an individual who pretended to be a businessman, but had nothing to do 
with trade, as it was practiced by the merchants. 

'Dark clouds have gathered over your heads' said Hotsporn gravely, letting his dark eyes 
roam over the room and the faces of each of the Rats. 'Not only is the governor of Amarillo 
hunting you, but also Varnhagen and Baron Casadei...' 

'The Baron?' Giselher grimaced. 'The governor and the Varnhagens I can understand, but 
what does Casadei have against us?' 

Hotsporn grinned. 'The wolf puts on sheep's clothing and starts bleating pitifully, 'baa, 
baa, nobody likes me, no one understands me. When I look to leave, they throw stones at me, 
screaming 'Be off!'. Why, why must I suffer such insults and injustice?' – The daughter of 
the Baron Casadei, dear Rats, is in poor health after the escapade at Stelzbach and still has a 
fever...' 

'Ahhh,' recalled Giselher. 'The coach with four tabby horses! Was that the lady?' 

'Yes. Now, as I said, she suffers. She wakes up screaming in night, remembering the Lord 
Kayleigh... and in particular Miss Falka. And the brooch, a memento from her dear mother, 
that was violently torn from her dress by Miss Falka. Where Miss Falka said all sorts of 
things.' 

'That's not at all what happened!' Ciri shouted from the table, glad to have the 
opportunity to cry and vent her pain. 'We were reserved and respectful towards the Baroness 
and we let them go free! Someone should have fucked the maid!' 

'Indeed.' Ciri felt Hotsporn's gaze on her bare thighs. 'It was truly a great insult to not 
'fuck the maid'. It's no wonder then that Casadei drummed up his wrath, armed his House, 
and offered a reward. He has publicly vowed to hang all of your heads from the corbels of his 
castle walls. He has also vowed that, for the brooch torn from his daughter's dress, Miss 
Falka will have the skin torn from her. In strips.' 

Ciri cursed while the other Rats laughed and yelled. Spark sneezed and spit – a result of 
the Fisstech provoking her mucosa. 

'We are always hunted!' she said as she wiped her nose, mouth, chin and the table with a 
cloth. 'The governor, the Baron, the Varnhagens! They pursue us, but they do not understand! 
We are the Rats! We doubled back three times behind the river Velde, and now these idiots 
are on a mad hunt along a cold trail. By the time they notice it is a false trail, they will be too 
far to turn back.' 

'They should turn back!' said Asse, who had come in a little while ago from his guard 


post. No one had replaced him and no one made any move to replace him now. 'Then we will 
take them in the rear!' 

'Exactly,' shouted Ciri from the table, who had already forgotten how afraid she had been 
the night before when they had been fleeing pursuers throughout the small villages by the 
Velde. 

'Enough' Giselher slapped his palm on the table and the loud chatter stopped 
immediately. 'Speak, Hotsporn. I can see that you want to tell us something, something more 
important than the governor, Varnhagen, or Baron Casadei and his sensitive daughter.' 

'Bonhart is tracking you.' 

There was a silence, an unusually long silence. Even Master Alma Vera stopped for a 
moment to listen. 

'Bonhart.' repeated Giselher slowly. 'The old gray bastard. We must have really stepped 
on someone's toes.' 

'Someone rich,' confirmed Mistle. 'Not many could afford Bonhart.' 

Ciri was about to ask what this Bonhart was, but before she had the chance the same 
question was spoken simultaneously by Reef and Asse. 

'It is a bounty hunter,' explained Giselher gloomily. 'He started as a soldier, then became 
a travelling trader, and has finally succumbed to killing people for reward. He is a son of a 
bitch beyond compare.' 

'He is' Kayleigh said, rather carelessly, 'if everyone Bonhart has killed were buried in the 
same cemetery, it would be a half acre in size.' 

Mistle sprinkled a little white powder in the hollow between her thumb and forefinger, 
and snorted it violently up her nose. 

'Bonhart destroyed the gang of the Big Lothar', she said. 'He stabbed him and his brother, 
the one they called the Toadstool.' 

'More like he stabbed them in the back,' accused Kayleigh. 

'He also killed Valdez', added Giselher. 'And when Valdez was dead, his gang 
disintegrated. They were one of the best. A decent crowd, wherever something was 
happening. Good buddies. I once thought of joining them. Before we teamed up.' 

'True,' said Hotsporn. 'The likes of the Valdez gang will not be seen again soon. People 
sing songs about their escape from Sarda, where they had been surrounded by Varnhagens. 
Yes, those were firebrands and cavalier daredevils, filled with gentlemanly bravado! Hardly 
anyone could compete with them.' 

The Rats suddenly fell silent and stared at him with angry, flashing eyes. 


'We,' Kayleigh said after a while, 'have beaten a squadron of six of Nilfgaardian cavalry!' 

'We have bested the Nissiren,' growled Asse. 

'Hardly anyone can compete', hissed Reef, 'with us!' 

'That's right, Hotsporn.' Giselher thumped himself in the chest. 'The Rats are second to 
none, not even the gang of Valdez. Gentlemanly bravado, did you say? Let me tell you of 
ladies of excessive bravado. Three of them are sitting right here – Spark, Mistle and Falka. 
They were riding in broad daylight through the small town Druigh, when they learned a 
group of Varnhagens were sitting in the tavern. So, they went galloping through the tavern! 
Through it! And out into the front yard. The Varnhagens sat there with smashed tankards, 
spilled beer, and their mouths hanging open. Do you dare say it was not bravado?' 

'He does not say,' Mistle answered his question with a malicious smile. 'He does not say, 
because he knows who the Rats are. His guild knows it.' 

Master Alma Vera had finished the tattoo. Ciri thanked him with a regal expression, 
dressed, and sat down with the others. She hissed as she noticed Hotsporn's strange, 
appraising – and somewhat mocking – stare. She looked at him askance and snuggled 
ostentatiously close to Mistle's shoulder. She had already had practice cooling men's zeal and 
attentions after such romantic demonstrations. However, in the case of Hotsporn it was rather 
unnecessary, since the pseudo-merchant was not blatant in this regard. 

Hotsporn was a mystery to Ciri. She had only seen him once before, the rest had been told 
to her by Mistle. Giselher said Hotsporn and he had known each other for a long time and 
were buddies. They had agreed signals, slogans and meeting places. At such meetings 
Hotsporn supplied the information – then the Rats rode to the specified road and ambushed 
the specified convoy or merchant. Sometimes a specified person was killed. There was 
always a mark of safe passage – merchants with this sign may not be attacked. 

Initially, Ciri was surprised and a little disappointed – she had looked up to Giselher with 
admiration. The Rats seemed to be a model for freedom and independence, and she loved this 
freedom, this contempt for everything and everyone. And now suddenly she had to fulfil 
orders, as a mercenary captor is told by his superiors who they should beat. Not only did they 
carry out orders, but they obeyed with big ears. 

One hand washes the other, Mistle had said with a shrug when Ciri asked her about it. 
Hotsporn gives us commands, but he also gives information, thanks to which we survive. 
Freedom and contempt have their limits. In the end it is always the case that one is someone 
else's tool. 

That's life, little Falcon. 

Ciri was surprised and disappointed, but she quickly overcame it. She learned. She also 
learned not to be very surprised and not to expect too much – because then the 
disappointment did not hurt so much. 


'I, dear Rats,' said Hotsporn, pulling Ciri out of her reflection, 'have a cure for all your 
troubles. Against the Nissire, Barons, governors, even against Bonhart. Yes, yes. Even 
though the noose tightens around your neck, I know a way to save your skin.' 

Spark spluttered and Reef laughed out loud. But Giselher commanded silence with a 
gesture and let Hotsporn continue. 

'It means,' the merchant said after a pause, 'that in the next few days, an amnesty will be 
proclaimed. Even if someone is legally convicted, ha, even if someone is already on the 
gallows, he will be forgiven if he confesses. This applies to you too.' 

'Bullshit!' yelled Kayleigh with a slightly watery eyes, a result of the pinch of Fisstech he 
had just sniffed. 'A Nilfgaardian trick, a deception! Old hares like us do not fall for such 
rubbish!' 

'Enough!' Giselher held him back. 'Do not get too excited, Kayleigh. Hotsporn, as you 
know, does not ramble, gossip, or repeat useless information. He usually knows what he says 
and why. I'm sure he knows where this sudden Nilfgaardian generosity comes from, and I'm 
certain he will tell us.' 

'Emperor Emhyr' said Hotsporn quietly, 'is going to take a wife. We will soon have an 
Empress in Nilfgaard. That is why amnesty is being proclaimed. The Emperor is extremely 
happy and wants to make others happy as well.' 

'The happiness of the Emperor does not concern me one bit,' Mistle announced patiently. 
'And as for this amnesty, I would prefer not to take advantage of it, because to me this 
Nilfgaardian mercy somehow smells of fresh wood shavings. As if they were sharpening a 
stake, haha!' 

'I do not think,' answered Hotsporn with a shrug, 'that this is a ruse. It is a political 
matter. And a great one. Greater than the Rats. Greater than all of the local mobs together. 
This is about politics.' 

'Why the amnesty then?' Giselher frowned. 'I don't understand the point.' 

'Emperor Emhyr's marriage is politically motivated, and with the help of this marriage 
certain policy objectives could be achieved. The Emperor creates this marriage, this union, 
because he wants to unite the empire even more, to halt the border conflicts, and to bring 
peace. After all, do you know who he is marrying? Cirilla, heir to the throne of Cintra!' 

'Liar!' yelled Ciri. 'You liar!' 

'Why is Miss Falka calling me a liar?' Hotsporn turned his eyes to her. 'Is she, perhaps, 
even better informed?' 

'Always!' 

'Quiet, Falka.' Giselher frowned. 'You remained quiet on the table while they stabbed 


you in the buttocks, and now you yell? What's that Cintra, Hotsporn? What's a Cirilla? Why 
should this be so important?' 

'Cintra,' interjected Reef while he sprinkled Fisstech on his finger, 'is a little country in 
the north, which has been fought over by the Empire and the local rulers for three or four 
years now.' 

'True,' confirmed Hotsporn. 'The imperialists have subjected Cintra and even crossed the 
Yarra River, but later had to withdraw.' 

'Because they took a beating on the hill of Sodden,' growled Ciri. 'They have become so 
withdrawn that they would lose to a whisker's underpants!' 

'I see Miss Falka is familiar with the latest story. Commendable, very commendable at 
such a young age. May I ask where Miss Falka is going to school?' 

'You may not!' 

'Enough,' Giselher called them back to order. 'Talk of this Cintra, Hotsporn. And of the 
amnesty.' 

'The Emperor Emhyr,' said the merchant, 'has decided to make Cintra an ivy state...' 

'A what?' 

'An ivy state. As ivy cannot exist without a powerful trunk upon which to grow. And 
naturally, this trunk is Nilfgaard. There are already such states, for example Metinna, Maecht, 
Toussaint... the local dynasties still rule there. Though only in appearance, of course.' 

'They're called puppet-states', boasted Reef. 

'I've heard the term.' 

'The problem with Cintra, however, was that the royal line had been extinguished there...' 

'Extinguished?' For a moment it looked as if green sparks were about to shoot from Ciri's 
eyes. 'Extinguished due to the fact that the Nilfgaardians murdered Queen Calanthe! Nothing 
but common murderers!' 

'I confess', Hotsporn gestured for Giselher to reseat himself, because he had risen at Ciri's 
repeated interference, 'that Miss Falka's knowledge continues to shine brilliantly here. Queen 
Calanthe has indeed fallen during the war. Also supposedly killed was Cirilla, her 
granddaughter, the last of the royal blood. So Emhyr did not have much to work with to 
create, as Mr. Reef has so wisely identified, a puppet-state. But since Cirilla has suddenly 
been found, the story of her death must have only been a fabrication.' 

'All stories are,' snorted Spark, leaning on Giselher's shoulder. 

'Indeed' Hotsporn nodded 'one must admit it's a little bit like a fairy tale. It is said that an 
evil sorceress held this Cirilla captive in a magical tower somewhere far in the north. But she 


– Cirilla, not the witch – was able to flee and seek asylum in the empire.' 

'That is one big, bloody, clusterfuck of lies and nonsense!' Ciri burst out and reached for 
the jar of Fisstech with trembling hands. 

'That may be,' Hotsporn continued slowly, 'But Emperor Emhyr proclaimed that he fell 
helplessly in love with her at first sight and he now wants to take her to be his wife.' 

'The little Falcon is right,' said Mistle decisively, emphasizing her words by banging her 
fist on the table. 'This is fucking nonsense! I don't pretend to understand what this is about. 
But one thing is certain: To place any hope in this nonsense of grace and mercy from 
Nilfgaard would be even greater nonsense.' 

'Right,' agreed Reef. 'The marriage of the Emperor is not our concern. And if the 
Emperor that I know is marrying someone, another fiancée awaits us. The hemp noose!' 

'It's not about your necks, dear Rats', Hotsporn reminded them. 'It's about politics. The 
northern borders of the Empire have constantly had rebellions, riots and unrest, especially in 
this Cintra and the surrounding areas. If the Emperor marries the heir of Cintra, then Cintra 
will calm down. There will be a formal amnesty and the rebel groups will come down from 
the mountains, no longer bothering the Imperials or making trouble. What I can tell you is 
this: if a Cintrierin ascends the imperial throne, rebels will be enlisted in the Imperial army. 
And you know that in the north, across the river Yarra, war is waged and every soldier is 
needed.' 

'Aha.' Kayleigh grimaced. 'Now I understand! What a wonderful amnesty! You only 
have one choice: the sharpened stake here and now, or the imperial colours. Either the stake 
in your ass or the colours on your back. And off to war to die for the Empire!' 

'Off to war,' said Hotsporn slowly 'Yes, some will go off to war in the way of song. But 
it does not mean all have to go to war, dear Rats. You can also – after you fulfil the 
conditions of the amnesty, of course – carry out a kind of...alternative service.' 

'What?' 

'I know what he means.' Giselher's teeth flashed briefly in his sun-scorched, blue-shaven 
visage. 'The merchants guild, children, would like to adopt us. To press us against their chest 
and protect us. Like they were our mother.' 

'More like our madame,' muttered Spark. Hotsporn pretended not to hear her. 

'You're right, Giselher,' he said coolly. 'The guild can transfer you. Officially, as a 
community service. And grant you protection. Officially and alternatively.' 

Kayleigh was about to speak, and Mistle also wanted to say something, but a quick glance 
from Giselher shut their mouths tight. 

'Submit to the guild...' said the leader of the Rats in an icy tone, 'We are grateful for the 


offer. We will think it over – contemplate it and discuss it amongst ourselves. What will you 
do now?' 

Hotsporn stood. 'I will ride off.' 

'Now, without resting for the night?' 

'I'll rest in the village overnight. This station does not strike me a safe location. And 
tomorrow straight on to the border of Metinna, then on the main road to Forgeham where I'm 
going to stop until the equinox, perhaps longer. I'll be waiting there, namely for people who 
have already thought it over and are ready to come forward and accept my protection under 
the amnesty. And I have some parting advice for you, you should not waste too much time in 
reflection and contemplation. Because Bonhart will anticipate the amnesty.' 

'The way you keep trying to frighten us with Bonhart,' Giselher said slowly and stood up. 
'You'd think the bastard was right on our doorstep... I'm sure he is far away over hill and 
dale...' 

'... in the village of Jealousy,' Hotsporn quietly finished the sentence. 'At the inn, The 
Chimera's Head. About thirty miles from here. If you wouldn't have doubled back behind the 
Velde yesterday, you would have met him by now.' 

'But you don't care about that, I'm sure. Good luck, Giselher. Take care, Rat. Master 
Alma Vera? I ride for Metinna and I am always happy to travel with a companion... What say 
you, Master? Happy? I thought so. Gather your belongings. Rats – pay the master for his 
artistic work.' 

 

*** 

 

The post office smelled of fried onions and sour potato soup, prepared by the wife of the 
postmaster, who had been temporarily released from the pantry. The candle on the table 
gleamed and flickered, the tongue of flame moving back and forth. The Rats were bent so 
low over the table that their flame-warmed heads almost collided with each other. 

'He's in Jealousy,' Giselher said quietly. 'At the Chimera's Head inn. Hardly a day's ride 
from here. What do you think?' 

'The same as you,' growled Kayleigh. 'We ride over there and kill the son of a bitch.' 

'Avenge Valdez,' said Reef. 'And Toadstool.' 

'And no more,' hissed Spark, 'will Hotsporn or anyone else praise the bravado of others 
more than ours. They will see us deal with this Bonhart, this monster, this wolf man. They 
will see us nail his head to the door of the inn, so that the inn matches its name. They will see 
that he is not all that wonderful on the end of a great pike, but mortal like everyone else, and 


that he finally met his match. They will see who the best of gang from Korath to Pereplut is.' 

'There will be songs sung about us at fairs,' Kayleigh said ardently. 'Ha, and in palaces!' 

'Let's ride.' Asse pounded his fist on the table. 'Let's ride and kill the bastard!' 

'And afterwards', considered Giselher, 'we will think over this amnesty...over the guild... 
What's wrong with you Kayleigh, you look as though you've swallowed a bug? Pursuers are 
on our heels, and soon it will be winter. Here is my plan, Rats: We will spend the winter 
warming our backsides by the heat of the fireplace. The amnesty will protect us from the cold 
weather, and give us moderately warmed beer to drink. We will endure quite well under this 
amnesty... until it is just about spring. And in the spring... as soon as the grass peeks out from 
beneath the snow...' 

The Rats were laughing in unison, quietly and menacingly. Their eyes lit up like real rats 
when they come to a dark corner at night and find a wounded man, who cannot defend 
himself. 

'Let's drink,' said Giselher. 'To Bonhart biting the dust! We'll want to finish this soup and 
head to bed. And sleep well, because we leave at dawn.' 

'Sure,' snorted Spark. 'Look to Mistle and Falka for an example. They've already been 
bed for an hour.' 

The wife of the postmaster winced at the cooking pot when she heard the low, vicious, 
disgusting giggles coming from the table. 

 

*** 

 

Ciri raised her head and remained silent a long time, gazing at the barely glowing flames 
of the lamp, in which the last of the remaining oil burned. 

'Then I crept like a thief out of the station', she resumed her narrative. 'Before morning, 
when it was still dark... But I was not able to escape unnoticed. Mistle must have woken 
when I rose from the bed. She caught me in the barn while I saddled my horse. But she 
showed no surprise. She didn't even try to hold me back... dawn was approaching already...' 

'Dawn also approaches now.' Vysogota yawned. 'Time to sleep, Ciri. Tell me more 
tomorrow.' 

'Maybe you're right.' She also yawned, got up, and stretched herself vigorously. 'I can 
barely keep my eyes open. But at this rate, hermit, I'm never going to finish. How many 
evenings are behind us? At least ten. I'm afraid the whole story will take me a thousand and 
one nights.' 


'We have time, Ciri. We have time.' 

 

*** 

 

'From whom do you flee, little Falcon? From me? Or from you?' 

'I'm done with fleeing. Now I want to catch something. Therefore I must return... to 
where it all began. I have to. Understand that, Mistle.' 

'So that's why... why you were kind to me today. For the first time after so many days... 
One last time before the parting? And then forgotten?' 

'I'll never forget you, Mistle.' 

'You will.' 

'Never. I promise you. And that was not the last time. I'll find you. I'll come get you... I'll 
come in a six-horse gilded coach. With a retinue of courtiers. You'll see. Soon I will have... 
possibilities. Great possibilities. I will make sure that your fate changes... You'll see. You will 
convince yourself how much I am able. How much I am able to change.' 

'That would require a lot of power,' sighed Mistle. 'And mighty magic...' 

'That's possible.' Ciri licked her lips. 'Even magic... with which I can find... everything 
that I once lost, can return... and belong to me again. I promise you, you'll be surprised if we 
meet again.' 

Mistle turned her close-cropped head away and looked at the blue and pink stripes, which 
the dawn was already painting on the eastern edge of the world. 

'Indeed,' she said quietly. 'I'll be very surprised if we meet again. If I ever see you again. 
Now get riding already. We do not want to draw this out.' 

'Wait for me.' Ciri sniffed. 'And don't get yourself killed. Think on the amnesty Hotsporn 
spoke of. Even if Giselher and the others don't want it... but you think about it, Mistle. It 
might be a way to survive. Because I will come back for you. I swear it.' 

'Kiss me.' 

Dawn broke. The brightness increased, along with the cold. 

'I love you, Mistle.' 

'I love you, little Falcon. Now get riding already.' 

 


*** 

 

'Of course, she did not believe me. She was convinced I wouldn't be able to handle the 
anxiety of riding after Hotsporn, that she would have to find and rescue me, and that, in the 
end, I would beg her pardon. How could she know what feelings had come over me when I 
heard Hotsporn speak of Cintra, of my grandmother... Calanthe. When he assumed that any 
'Cirilla' would become the wife of the Emperor of Nilfgaard. The same Emperor who had 
murdered my grandmother and had sent the black knight with the bird of prey wings on his 
helmet after me. I've told you about him, remember? On Thanedd Island, as he reached out 
for me, I cut him and left him to bleed! I had time to kill... But somehow I could not...' 

'I was stupid! Oh, what the heck, maybe he stayed there and bled to death on 
Thanedd...Why are you looking at me?' 

'Continue. Tell me how you rode after Hotsporn to gain your inheritance. In order to 
obtain what was yours.' 

'You don't need to speak so reproachfully, don't need to scoff. Yes, I realize that it was 
stupid, I see that now. Even back then... in Kaer Morhen and the Temple of Melitele I had 
been wiser – I knew that my past could not return, that I was no longer the princess of Cintra, 
but someone completely different, that I had no inheritance, that it was lost and that I had to 
accept it. It had been explained to me wisely and calmly, and I had accepted it. Likewise 
calmly. Then suddenly it began to return. The first time someone tried to impress me with the 
title of Baroness Casadei... I had never cared about such things before, but I suddenly became 
furious, stretching my nose up high and screaming that I would have an even higher title, that 
I was of much nobler birth. And from then on I couldn't stop thinking about it. I could feel the 
anger growing in me. Do you understand, Vysogota?' 

'Yes.' 

'And Hotsporn's story was the last straw. I was almost boiling with rage... They had 
previously talked to me so much of predestination... And now someone else was enjoying this 
predestination, thanks to an ordinary hoax. Someone had posed as me, as Ciri of Cintra, and 
could do anything, could bathe in the luxury... No, I could think of nothing else... Suddenly I 
realized that I never had enough to eat, that I was freezing cold, that I slept under the open 
sky, that I had to wash the private parts in icy streams... I! I could have had a gold-plated tub! 
Water that smells of lavender and roses! Warmed towels! A clean bed! Do you understand 
Vysogota?' 

'Yes.' 

'All of the sudden, I was ready to ride to the next province, to the next fort, to those black 
Nilfgaardians I feared and hated so much... I was willing to say, 'Hey Nilfgaardian idiots, I'm 
Ciri, I have not been taken by your stupid emperor for his wife, they have planted some 
brazen impostor with your emperor, and the idiot did not even notice the scam!' I was so keen 


that I would have done it, if an opportunity presented itself. Without hesitation. Do you 
understand Vysogota?' 

'Yes.' 

'Fortunately, I calmed down.' 

'To your good fortune.' He nodded seriously. 'Those imperial marriages have all the 
features of any state affair – a battle of political parties or factions. If you had revealed 
yourself, some influential forces would have made quick calculations about you and you 
probably would have ended up with a dagger in your back or poisoned, just to be safe.' 

'I also understood that. And I noticed. I remembered that well. To reveal who I was meant 
death. I had the opportunity to convince them. But I did not anticipate.' 

For a time they were silent while they worked on the skins. The catch of the last few days 
had been unexpectedly plentiful; they had found many muskrats and nutria in the traps and 
snares, as well as two otters and a beaver. They had a lot of work to do. 

'Did you catch up to Hotsporn?' Vysogota finally asked. 

'Yes.' Ciri wiped her forehead with her sleeve. 'And I caught up with him quickly, 
because he was in no hurry. And he wasn't even surprised when he saw me!' 

 

*** 

 

'Miss Falka!' Hotsporn pulled his reins and his black mare turned and pranced. 'What a 
very pleasant surprise! Although I must admit that it is not quite as large as it is pleasant. I 
expected you, I'll admit that I expected you. I could see that you were about to make a 
decision. A wise decision. I see the sparkle of intelligence in those beautiful and enchanting 
eyes.' 

Ciri rode closer, so close that their stirrups almost touched. Then she cleared her throat, 
leaned over and spat on the sand of the road. She had learned to spit in such a way – it was 
disgusting, but also effective to cool the zeal of a would-be seducer. 

'I suppose,' said Hotsporn with a hint of smile, 'that you wish to take advantage of the 
amnesty?' 

'Then you suppose wrong.' 

'To what then, should I attribute the joy given to me at the sight of the lady's beautiful 
little face?' 

'Do you need a reason?' She hissed. 'At the station you said that you always welcome 
travelling companions.' 


'True.' His smile was open. 'But if I am wrong in regards to the amnesty, then I do not 
know whether we have the same path. We are, as you can see, at a crossroads. A crossroads, 
four directions, the need to decide... the symbolism from the famous fairy tale. If you go east, 
you will not return... If you go west, you will not return... and north... hmm... To the north of 
this post, lies the amnesty...' 

'Stick your amnesty somewhere else.' 

'As the lady orders. So where, may I ask, are you headed? Which direction of the 
symbolic crossroads? Master Alma Vera, the artist of the needle, has driven his mule to the 
west, to the town of Fano. The eastern highway leads to the settlement of Jealousy, though I 
would urgently advise against travelling that way...' 

'The Yarra River,' said Ciri slowly, 'which you spoke of in the station... it is the 
Nilfgaardian name for the Yaruga, is not it?' 

'The young lady is so knowledgeable' – he leaned forward and looked into her eyes – 
'but does not know that?' 

'Can't you respond properly when you are politely asked a question?' 

'I was just having a little fun, why are you so angry? Yes, it is the same river. In Elvish 
and Nilfgaardian the Yarra, in the north the Yaruga.' 

'And the mouth of this river,' continued Ciri, 'is in Cintra?' 

'Yes, my lady. Cintra.' 

'How far is it from here, Cintra? How many miles?' 

'A lot. And it depends on whose mile you use. Nearly every other nation has their own 
measurement, and it is easy to confuse them. That is why the travelling merchants measure 
such distances in days. To ride from here to Cintra would take twenty-five or thirty such 
days.' 

'Where? Directly to the north?' 

'It appears Miss Falka is very interested in this Cintra. Why?' 

'I will ascend the throne there.' 

'Okay, okay.' Hotsporn raised his hands in a defensive gesture. 'I can see that it's a 
delicate matter, I won't ask any more questions. The easiest way to Cintra, paradoxically, is 
not directly to the north, because roadless terrain and a marshy lake district will impede your 
progress. Instead, you should travel to the city Forgeham, and then ride to northwest for 
Metinna, the capital of the country with the same name. Then you cross the Mag Deira Plains 
and follow the trade route until you reach the city of Neunreuth. Take the north highway out 
of Neunreuth, which runs along the valley of river Yelena. From there it is easy to find: 
follow the constant lines of troops and military transports that travel the road. That will lead 


you to the valley of Marnadal, by Nasair, and over the Marnadal Stairs, the pass that leads 
north. And that's already Cintra.' 

'Hmm...' Ciri stared at the misty horizon, blurred with lines of black hills. 'After 
Forgeham, ride to the northwest... that means... how far?' 

'You know what, Miss?' Hotsporn smiled gently. 'I'm on my way to Forgeham, and then 
onto Metinna and the trade route that extends between the hills. If the lady will ride with me, 
she will not get lost. Towards amnesty, but not to amnesty. Still, it would be my pleasure to 
work and travel with such a beautiful young lady.' 

Ciri gave him the coldest look she had. Hotsporn returned a mischievous smile. 'So what 
do you think?' 

'Let's go.' 

'Bravo, Miss Falka. A wise decision. As I said, the lady is as smart as she is beautiful.' 

'Stop calling me Miss, Hotsporn. The way you say it makes it sound insulting somehow, 
and I will not be insulted with impunity.' 

'As the lady orders.' 

 

*** 

 

The beautiful dawn had not fulfilled the expectations it had set. The day that followed was 
gray and wet. 

Damp fog dulled the bright colours of autumn foliage on the trees, which leaned over the 
road. Thousands of browns, reds and yellows could be seen. 

The humid air smelled of bark and fungi. 

They rode at a walk on a cushion of fallen leaves, but Hotsporn often drove his black 
mare to a trot or gallop. Ciri watched enviously. 

'Does she have a name?' 

'No.' Hotsporn smiled, teeth gleaming. 'I treat mounts from the point of usefulness; they 
change very often, so I pay them no loyalty. I consider it over the top to name horses if you 
are not keeping a breeding book. Don't you agree? The horse Goldhans, the dog Bello, and 
the cat Mohrle. Over the top!' 

Ciri did not like the looks he gave her or his eloquent smile, and least of all the slightly 
mocking tone in which he asked or answered questions. So she used a simple approach – 
silent, monosyllabic language that did not provoke him. If it worked. Sometimes it did not 


work. Especially when he talked about his amnesty. However, when she once again – and 
quite sharply – expressed her displeasure, Hotsporn surprisingly changed tactics: He suddenly 
proclaimed that the amnesty was unnecessary in their case, because it didn't even apply to 
them. The amnesty was for criminals, he said, not the victims of crime. 

Ciri laughed uproariously. 'You are a victim yourself, Hotsporn!' 

'I'm quite serious,' he assured her. 'I'm not trying to make you laugh, but rather 
suggesting a way that you can save your skin if you are ever captured. Of course, it won't 
work with Baron Casadei, and the Varnhagens would show you no mercy either – in the best 
case, you would be lynched on the spot, quickly and painlessly if you were lucky. However, 
if you are captured by the governor and stand before the strict but fair face of imperial 
justice... Well, then I would suggest this defence tactic: You break down in tears and declare 
yourself the innocent victim of circumstances.' 

'Who would believe that?' 

'Everyone.' Hotsporn leaned over in the saddle and looked into her eyes. 'Because it is 
the truth. You're an innocent victim, Falka. You are not yet sixteen years old, so according to 
the laws of the Empire you're underage. You came into the Rats' gang by chance. It's not 
your fault that one of the female bandits, Mistle, had an eye for you, her unnatural tendencies 
are well known. You have been subjugated by Mistle, sexually exploited and forced to...' 

'Well, there I'm going to have to interrupt you, yes,' Ciri was surprised by her calm 
voice. 'Finally we have it, the truth about you, Hotsporn. I've experienced people like you 
before.' 

'Really?' 

'Like every cockerel' – she was still speaking calmly – 'Your crest swells at the thought 
of Mistle and me. Like every stupid little man, the thought arises in your stupid head that you 
should try to cure me of this unnatural disease and lead me back onto the path of reality. But 
you know what is disgusting and unnatural in all this? Those very thoughts!' 

Hotsporn looked at her silently, with a somewhat enigmatic smile on his thin lips. 

'My thoughts, dear Falka,' he said after a while, 'might not be decent, might not be pretty, 
might not be... pah, they obviously aren't innocent... But, by the gods, they are in accordance 
with nature. My nature. You insult me, if you think my affection for you is based on some... 
perverse curiosity. Ha, you insult yourself if you ignore or do not notice the fact that your 
seductive charm and the exceptional beauty of your assets force every man to his knees. That 
the magic of your glance...' 

'Listen, Hotsporn,' she interrupted him. 'Are you just counting down the moments until 
you can sleep with me?' 

'What shrewdness.' He spread his hands. 'I have no words.' 


'Then I'll help you.' She drove her horse forward a little and looked back at him over her 
shoulder. 'Because I have enough words to share. I am honoured. Under other circumstances, 
who knows... If it were anyone other than you, ha! But you, Hotsporn, do not appeal to me at 
all. Nothing, absolutely nothing about you attracts me. I would say quite the contrary: 
Everything about you repels me. You must admit that, under such circumstances, sexual 
intercourse would be an act against nature.' 

Hotsporn drove his horse forward as well and continued to smile. The black mare began 
to prance down the road and gracefully threw up her lovely head. Ciri turned side to side in 
the saddle, struggling with a strange sensation that had suddenly arisen in her, somewhere 
deep inside, in the lower abdomen. It rapidly and persistently pushed outward, on the skin 
irritated by clothing. I told him the truth, thought Ciri. I do not like him, hell, it his horse that 
I like, his black mare. Not him, but the horse... What a fucking idiot! No, no, no! Even if I 
disregard Mistle, it would be ridiculous and stupid for me to give in to him only because I am 
excited by the sight of a black horse prancing on the road. 

Hotsporn approached and looked into her eyes with a curious smile. Then he jerked at the 
reins again, forcing the mare to stamp and turn sideways, prancing. He knows, Ciri thought, 
he old bastard knows what I feel. 

Damn it. I'm just curious! 

'Pine needles,' said Hotsporn gently, while he rode up close and stretched out his hand, 
'have become hooked in your hair. I'll take them out, if you allow. I should add that the 
gesture springs from my gallantry, not a perverse desire.' 

She was not surprised to discover his touch felt pleasant to her. The decision was still very 
far away, but for safety's sake she calculated the days since her last menstrual period. 
Yennefer had taught her – count in advance and with a cool head, because later, when things 
heat up, the head takes on a strange reluctance for calculating, along with an inclination to 
take consequences too lightly. 

Hotsporn looked into her eyes and smiled, as if he knew that the calculation had come out 
in his favour. If only he were not so old, Ciri secretly sighed. He must be more than thirty. 

'Tourmalines.' Hotsporn's fingers gently touched her ear and the earring. 'Pretty, but only 
tourmalines. I would give you emeralds to wear. Their precious and penetrating green would 
be more appropriate for your beauty and eye colour.' 

'Look,' she said slowly and looked at him boldly, 'even if something were going to 
happen, I would demand the emeralds in advance. Because surely horses aren't the only thing 
you treat in terms of usefulness, Hotsporn. The morning after an exciting night you would 
think it 'over the top' for me to remind you of my name. The dog Bello, the cat Mohrle, and 
the girl – Marie!' 

'Quite right.' He forced a smile. 'You manage to cool down even the most passionate 
desires, Snow Queen.' 


'I had a good teacher.' 

The fog had lifted a little, but it was still cloudy. And sleepy. The sleepiness was brutally 
interrupted by shouts and the sound of hooves. Riders emerged from behind the oaks they had 
just past. 

Both acted so quickly and so in step with one another that it appeared they had rehearsed 
it for weeks. They stopped, turned the horses, and instantly went into a furious gallop, 
crouching to their horses' manes and urging them on with cries and heel strikes. Screaming, 
stomping, and rattling could be heard over the buzz of the feathered arrows that flew above 
their heads. 

'Into the forest,' Hotsporn called to her. 'Turn off into the woods! Into the brush!' 

They veered off without slowing down. Ciri pressed herself flat, almost down to her 
horse's neck, because the branches whipping at her threatened to pull her from the saddle. She 
saw a crossbow bolt strike and splinter the trunk of an alder tree as she rode past. Screaming, 
she urged her horse to go faster, expecting an arrow to pierce her back at any moment. 
Hotsporn, riding tight beside her, suddenly let out a strange groan. 

They set off next to a deep ravine and rode down a hill at breakneck speed into a large 
undergrowth of thorn bushes. Suddenly, Hotsporn slipped from the saddle and fell into the 
bushes. The black mare whinnied, reared up, flicked her tail and ran. Ciri did not hesitate. 
She jumped off and gave her horse a slap on the rump. It raced after the black mare as Ciri 
helped Hotsporn get up. The two humans fled deeper into the underbrush, through a clump of 
alders, and launched themselves into the ravine. They rolled down the slope and landed at 
the bottom of the ravine among high ferns. Moss and mushrooms softened their fall. 

Hoofs echoed from the top of the slope – luckily their pursuers were riding through the 
forest, chasing after the fleeing horses. No one seemed to notice that they had disappeared 
into the ferns. 

'Who are they?' whispered Ciri. She wiggled her way out from under Hotsporn, who had 
landed on her during the fall, then started picking mushrooms out of her hair. 'The governor's 
people? The Varnhagens?' 

'Ordinary bandits...' Hotsporn spat leaves. 'Ruffians...' 

'Offer the amnesty to them.' She crunched sand between their teeth. 'Promise them...' 

'Be quiet. They might hear you.' 

'Hooo! Hooo! Heeeeree!' It sounded condescending. 'Go around from left! From the 
leeefttt!' 

'Hotsporn?' 

'Yes?' 


'You have blood on your back.' 

'I know,' he replied coldly as he tore a strip of cloth from the front of his shirt and turned 
his back to her. 'Stuff it under my shirt. By my left shoulder blade...' 

'Where did it get you? I don't see a bolt...' 

'It was a pellet crossbow... loaded with a piece of iron, most likely capped with a 
blacksmith's nail. Don't touch it. It's too close to the spine...' 

'Damn it. What should I do then?' 

'Remain silent. They are coming back.' 

Hooves pounded and someone whistled shrilly. Someone yelled, cried, and issued an 
order to turn around. Ciri pricked up her ears. 

'Ride away,' she murmured. 'They have abandoned the pursuit. And they failed to 
capture the horses.' 

'That's good.' 

'We won't be able to capture them either. Will you be able to walk?' 

'I won't need to.' He smiled, showing her a rather cheap looking bracelet on his wrist. 'I 
bought this glittering thing alongside the horse. It's magical. The mare has carried it from 
childhood. If I rub it, like now, it's as if I call her. As if she hears my voice. And she comes 
running here. It will take a while, but she will come. With a bit of luck, your mare will come 
with her.' 

'And without a bit of luck? You ride off alone?' 

'Falka,' he said in a grave tone. 'I would not be able to ride off alone, I need your help. 
You will need to keep me in the saddle. I'm starting to lose feeling in my toes. I might lose 
consciousness. Listen up: This gulch leads to a valley with a stream. Ride upstream, to the 
north. Bring me to a place called Tegamo. We'll need to find someone there who can pull the 
iron out of my back, because without that I will die or become paralyzed.' 

'Is that the nearest town?' 

'No. The nearest is Jealousy, about twenty miles downstream along the valley in the 
opposite direction. But you cannot ride there.' 

'Why?' 

'You absolutely cannot ride there,' he repeated, grimacing. 'because it's not about me but 
about you. Jealousy means death for you.' 

'I don't understand.' 


'You don't need to. Trust me.' 

'You told Giselher...' 

'Forget Giselher. If you want to live, forget them all.' 

'Why?' 

'Stay with me. I keep my promises, Snow Queen. I'm going to outfit you with emeralds... 
cover you with them...' 

'Indeed, a great time for jokes.' 

'It is always time for jokes.' 

Hotsporn suddenly embraced her, pressed her shoulder to the ground and began to 
unbutton her blouse. Without ceremony, but without haste. 

Ciri pushed away his hand. 'Indeed,' she growled. 'A great time for that too!' 

'But any time is good. Especially for me, now. I told you, it's the backbone. Tomorrow's 
problems can fix themselves... What are you doing? Oh, damn...' 

This time she had pushed him away strongly. Too strongly. Hotsporn turned pale, bit his 
lips, moaned in pain. 

'I'm sorry. But if someone is injured, they must lie still.' 

'The proximity of your body lets me forget the pain.' 

'Stop it, damn it!' 

'Falka... Have pity on a suffering person.' 

'You will suffer if you do not take your hands away. Immediately!' 

'Quiet... The bandits might hear us... Your skin is like satin... stop fighting it, for heaven's 
sake.' 

Oh, what the hell, Ciri thought. Why do I have to attach importance to it? I'm curious. I'm 
allowed to be curious. My feelings have nothing to do with it. I will treat him in terms of 
usefulness and nothing else. And forget about him without fuss. 

She gave herself to his touch and the pleasant sensation that it brought with it. She turned 
her head, but then thought it would appear like excessive modesty and false shame – she 
would not be thought of as a seduced innocent. She looked him straight in the eyes, but then 
stopped as it appeared like excessive daring and challenging – another impression she did not 
want to give. So she simply closed her eyes, threw her arms around his neck and helped him 
with the buttons, because he was having trouble and wasting time. 

The contact of fingers was followed by the contact of lips. She was on the verge of 


forgetting the whole world, when Hotsporn suddenly stopped moving. For a while she lay 
patiently, reminding herself that he was wounded and the wound was probably bothering 
him. But he took too long. His saliva began to dry on her nipples. 

'Hey, Hotsporn? Did you fall asleep?' 

Something was running down her chest and side. She touched it with her fingers. Blood. 

'Hotsporn!' She pushed him away. 'Hotsporn, are you dead?' 

A silly question, she thought. It is obvious. It is obvious that he is dead. 

 

*** 

 

'He died with his head on my breast.' Ciri turned her head to the side. The red embers in 
the fireplace seemed to reflect on her disfigured cheek. Or perhaps she was blushing. 
Vysogota was not sure. 

'The only thing I felt back then,' she added, her face still turned away, 'was 
disappointment. Does that shock you?' 

'No. Not anymore.' 

'I understand. I'm trying to tell everything without glossing over anything, without 
twisting anything, and without hiding anything. Although I sometimes feel like it, especially 
the latter.' She sniffed and wiped her eye with her thumb. 

'I've covered him with branches and stones. Somehow, I'm not sure. It was dark and I had 
to spend the night there. The bandits were still in the area searching. When I heard their cries 
and I was sure that they were no ordinary bandits. But, I didn't know who they were chasing 
– me or him. So I had to sit still. All through the night. Until dawn. Beside the body. Brrr.' 

'At dawn,' she continued, after a while, 'no signs of the bandits remained and I could get 
on the road. I already had a mount. The magic bracelet, which I had taken from Hotsporn, 
actually worked. The black mare returned. Now she belonged to me. That was my gift. There 
is such a custom on the Skellig Islands, you know? A girl's first lover gives her an expensive 
gift. What did it matter that mine had died before he could be my lover?' 

 

*** 

 

The mare stamped her front feet on the ground, whinnied, and turned to one side, as if she 
wanted to be admired. Ciri could not suppress a sigh of admiration when she saw her neck, 


straight and slim but very muscular, the small, well-shaped forehead, the high withers, and 
the admirably well-proportioned physique. 

Ciri approached the mare cautiously and showed her the bracelet on her wrist. The mare 
snorted and pricked her ears up, but allowed Ciri to take the bridle and stroke her velvety 
nose. 

'Kelpie' said Ciri. 'You're as black and smart as a Kelpie from the sea. You are magical 
like a Kelpie. So you shall be called Kelpie. And I couldn't care less whether it is over the top 
or not.' 

The mare snorted, pricked her ears up, and flicked her silky tail, which reached to her 
ankles. Ciri, who was used to riding in a high saddle, shortened the stirrup straps and stroked 
the unusually shallow, wooden framed saddle with no saddle horn. She put a boot in the 
stirrup, and grasped the horse by the mane. 'Calm down, Kelpie.' 

Contrary to appearances, the saddle was quite comfortable. And for obvious reasons, 
much lighter than the usual cavalry saddles. 

'Now,' said Ciri as she patted the mare's warm neck, 'we'll see if you're fiery as well. 
Whether you're a real thoroughbred or just a mix-breed. What do you think of a gallop of 
twenty miles, Kelpie?' 

 

*** 

 

If someone managed to sneak through the night and find the deeply hidden hut with a 
moss thatched roof amidst the swamps, and if they peeked through the cracks in the shutters, 
they would have seen a gray-bearded old man listening to the story of a teenage girl with 
green eyes and ash-blond hair. 

They would have seen that the remains of the embers in the hearth were bright and lively, 
as if in anticipation of what was to be told. 

But that was not possible. No one could see that. The cabin of old Vysogota was well 
hidden in the reeds of the marsh. In an eternally shrouded fog desert that no one dared enter. 

 

*** 

 

'The valley with the stream was even and well suited for riding, so Kelpie ran like a 
whirlwind. Of course, I did not ride upstream, but downstream. I had remembered the curious 
name: Jealousy. I recalled what Hotsporn said to Giselher in the station. I knew why he had 


warned me about the town. An ambush was waited for the Rats in Jealousy. As soon as 
Giselher had dismissed the offer of amnesty and work for the guild, Hotsporn had specifically 
reminded him of the bounty hunter who had taken up quarters in the town. He knew that the 
Rats would swallow the bait. That they would ride to the town and to calamity. I had to get to 
the vicinity of Jealousy, intercept them, and warn them. Convince them to turn around. Save 
them all. Or at least Mistle.' 

'I can imagine,' muttered Vysogota, 'that you did not succeed.' 

'At the time,' she said flatly, 'I thought a couple of divisions, armed to the teeth, waited in 
Jealousy. I didn't even dream that the ambush might be a single man...' 

She paused, gazing into the darkness. 

'I had no idea what kind of man that was.' 

 

*** 

 

Birka was once a prosperous village. It had a charming and extremely picturesque 
location – its yellow straw and red-tiled rooftops crowded close together in the middle of a 
valley with steep, wooded slopes, which changed their colour depending on the season. 
Especially in autumn, the sight of Birka pleased the aesthetic eye or sensitive heart. 

So it was up to the time when the settlement changed its name. It happened like this: 

A young elven farmer from the nearby colony of elves fell madly in love with the 
daughter of the miller of Birka. The easygoing miller's daughter laughed at the advances of 
the elf, but spread her charms with neighbours, acquaintances and even a relative. So the 
people began to mock the Elf and his blind love. The elf broke – quite atypical for an elf – 
and unleashed his anger and vengeance in a horrible way. One night, when there was a 
favourably strong wind, he lit a fire and burned Birka to the ground. 

Burned out and ruined, the villagers lost their courage. Some wandered the world; others 
fell into sloth and booze. The money collected for the reconstruction was embezzled and 
drank away. The town now offered an image of poverty and misery: it was a collection of 
ugly and haphazardly cobbled together shacks under the bare and blackened valley slope. 
Before the fire, Birka had an oval shape with a small square in the middle. Now, the few 
reasonably well reconstructed homes, stores and distilleries formed something like a long 
street. At the end of the street they worked together to build the inn, 'The Chimera's Head', 
whose landlady was a widow of the blaze. 

And for seven years, no one had used the name of Birka. Instead they called it Flame, or 
Zeal, or simply Jealousy. 


The Rats rode along the street of Jealousy. It was a cold, overcast, gloomy morning. 

The people rushed into their houses and hid themselves in shacks and mud huts. Everyone 
who had shutters slammed them shut with a bang. Everyone who had a door locked and 
barricaded it. Everyone who still had liquor drank to give them courage. The Rats were riding 
at a walk, ostentatiously slow, stirrup to stirrup. Their faces were painted with indifference 
and contempt, but their squinting eyes vigilantly watched every window, porch and corner. 

'A single crossbow bolt!' Giselher warned loudly, so that all could hear him. 'A single 
twang of a tendon, and there will be a massacre!' 

'And once again your town will meet flames!' added Spark in a full, high soprano. 'There 
will be nothing left but earth and water!' 

Certainly some of the people had crossbows, but no one was willing test whether the Rats 
were talking in the wind or not. 

The Rats dismounted. They crossed the fifty or sixty steps that separated them from The 
Chimera's Head on foot, side by side, with a rhythmic ringing and jingling of spurs, jewellery 
and clothing ornaments. 

Three locals, who had been soothing their hangovers with beer on the porch of the inn, 
disappeared at the sight of them. 

'If he's in there', muttered Kayleigh. 'We shouldn't have waited. We shouldn't have 
rested, but should have broken in at night and...' 

'You're stupid.' Spark bared her little teeth. 'If we want the bards to sing songs about it, 
we can't do it at night and in the dark. The people must see it! The morning is best, because 
everyone is still sober, isn't that right, Giselher?' 

Giselher did not answer. He picked up a rock, took aim and sent it crashing against the 
door. 'Come out, Bonhart!' 

'Come out, Bonhart!' The Rats repeated in chorus. 'Come out, Bonhart!' 

Steps echoed from inside. Slow and heavy. Mistle felt a chill run down her spine. 

Bonhart appeared at the door. 

The Rats instinctively took a step back, dug the high heels of their boots into the ground, 
and moved their hands to their hilts. The bounty hunter had his sword tucked under his arm, 
so he had his hands free – in one he was holding a peeled egg, in the other a crust of bread. 

He moved to the railing slowly, looking down on them from above. He stood on the 
porch, and he was huge. Gigantic, though thin as a ghoul. 

He stared at them, his watery eyes wandering over each of them one by one. He bit a 
piece of the egg, followed by a piece of the bread. 


'And where is Falka?' He said vaguely. A crumb of yolk fell out of his mouth. 

 

*** 

 

'Run, Kelpie! Run, Beautiful! Run as fast as you can!' 

The black mare whinnied loudly and bent her head forward at a breakneck gallop. Even 
though gravel went flying out from under them, her hooves barely seemed to touch the 
ground. 

 

*** 

 

Bonhart stretched lazily, his leather jerkin creaking, then slowly tightened his moose-
leather gloves and adjusted them carefully. 'Well, what is it?' He grimaced. 'You want to kill 
me, yes? Why?' 

'Yes, for Toadstool,' said Kayleigh. 

'And for fun', added Spark. 

'And so we have peace,' put in Reef. 

'Aah,' said Bonhart slowly. 'And so it goes! And if I promise to give you peace, will you 
let me go on my way?' 

'No, you gray dog, we will not.' Mistle smiled charmingly. 'We know you. We know that 
you do give anything to anyone and that you will creep after us and wait for an opportunity to 
stick a knife in our backs. Come out!' 

'Gently, gently.' Bonhart smiled, pulling his mouth as wide as the menacing gray 
moustache above it. 'There is always time to dance, don't get excited. First, I'll make you an 
offer, Rats. I'll leave the choice to you, and then you can do whatever you want.' 

'What are you mumbling there, old geezer?' Kayleigh cried and tensed slightly. 'Speak 
more clearly!' 

Bonhart nodded and scratched his leg. 'There is a bounty on you, Rats. A considerable 
bounty. And yes, I must make a living.' 

Spark hissed like a wildcat and glared at him with wildcat eyes. 

Bonhart folded his arms across his chest and moved the sword into his armpit. 'A 
considerable bounty,' he repeated, 'if you are dead and a little more if you are alive. Frankly, 


it is all the same to me. I have nothing against you personally. Just yesterday I was thinking 
that I would like to kill you for fun and entertainment, but you came here yourselves and 
saved me trouble, and that touches my heart. So I leave you the choice. How do you prefer I 
take you – alive or dead?' 

Kayleigh clenched his jaw and Mistle leaned forward, ready to pounce. 

Giselher grabbed her by the shoulder. 'He wants to make us angry,' he whispered. 'Let 
the bastard talk.' 

Bonhart snorted. 'Well?' He repeated. 'Alive or dead? I suggest the former. Because as 
you know: It is much, much less painful.' 

On cue, the Rats drew their weapons. Giselher swung his blade and froze in fencing 
posture. Mistle spat. 'Come here, you skeleton' she said with apparent calm. 'Come on, you 
bastard. We'll stab you like an old mutt.' 

'Thus you have chosen death.' Bonhart stared at something far away, over the rooftops, 
then slowly drew his sword and threw away the scabbard. He came down from the porch 
without haste, his spurs jingling. 

The Rats quickly spread across the width of the road. Kayleigh went furthest to the left, 
almost to the wall of a distillery. Next to him was Spark, her thin lips curled into her usual, 
terrible smile. Mistle, Asse and Reef went to the right. Giselher remained in the centre and 
scrutinized the bounty hunter with squinted eyes. 

'Very well, Rats.' Bonhart looked around the street, looked up to the sky, raised his sword 
and spit on the edge. 'If we going to dance, let's dance. Play music!' 

They jumped at one other like wolves, lightning-fast, silently and without warning. Blades 
whizzed through the air and the small street echoed with the mournful clang of steel. At first, 
all you could hear was swords clashing, sighs, moans, and heavy breathing. 

And then, suddenly and unexpectedly, the Rats began to scream. And to die. 

Reef was the first thrown out of the fray, he bounced back against a wall and his blood 
splattered the dirty white mortar. Then Asse broke off from the group with tottering steps, 
doubled over and fell on his side, writhing and clutching his knee. 

Bonhart spun and leapt like a top, surrounded by the flashing and whistling of blades. The 
Rats backed away from him, sprang forward, struck again, and backed away again, angry, 
stubborn, merciless. And unsuccessful. Bonhart parried, struck, parried, struck, attacked, 
attacked relentlessly, leaving no breathing space, setting the tempo. The Rats could only fall 
back. And die. 

Spark, taken in the neck, fell in the mud and curled up like a kitten, blood spurting from 
her aorta to her calves and knees. The bounty hunter beat back Mistle's and Giselher's wide, 
sweeping attacks, then he spun around and, with a lightning-quick strike from his sword tip, 


slit Kayleigh open – from collarbone to hip. Kayleigh dropped his sword, but did not notice – 
he just crouched and grabbed his chest and abdomen with both hands, blood gushing from 
under his palms. Bonhart dodged Giselher's blow with another spin, parried Mistle's attack 
and dealt another blow to Kayleigh, which turned one side of his head into scarlet pulp. The 
light-haired rat fell apart and left a puddle of blood mixing with the dirt road. 

Mistle and Giselher hesitated for a moment. Instead of fleeing, they shouted with one 
voice, wildly and furiously, and pounced on Bonhart. 

And they died. 

 

*** 

 

Ciri dashed into the village and galloped down the street. Splashes of mud flew from the 
hooves of the black mare. 

 

 *** 

 

Bonhart smashed his heel against Giselher, who was on the wall. The leader of the Rats 
showed no signs of life. No more blood flowed from his shattered skull. 

Mistle, who was on her knees looking for her sword, ran both hands through mud and 
mire without realizing that she was kneeling in a rapidly growing red puddle. Bonhart slowly 
walked toward her. 

'Noooo!' 

The bounty hunter raised his head. 

Ciri launched herself from the running horse, stumbled, and fell to one knee. 

Bonhart smiled. 'A Rat,' he said. 'The seventh Rat. Glad you're here. You will complete 
my collection.' 

Mistle found her sword, but was not able to lift it. She gasped and threw herself at 
Bonhart's feet, trembling fingers clutching his boots. She opened her mouth to scream, but 
instead of a cry a brilliant crimson torrent poured from her mouth. Bonhart stepped 
vigorously on her and pushed her into the dirt. But Mistle, who was holding her ripped open 
stomach, got back up. 

'Noooo' yelled Ciri. 'Miiistle!' 


The bounty hunter heeded her cry without even turning his head. He swung wide and 
struck with a powerful, sweeping blow, as with a scythe, so that Mistle was pulled up from 
the ground and thrown against the wall, like a soft cloth doll, like a red smeared rag. 

The cry in Ciri's throat died. Her hands trembled as she reached for her sword. 

'Murderer,' she said, surprised at the strangeness of her voice. At the strangeness of her 
mouth, which was suddenly incredibly dry. 'Murderer! Bastard!' 

Bonhart watched her curiously, head tilted slightly to the side. 'Do you want to die?' He 
asked. 

Ciri approached him and traced a semicircle around him. The sword in his raised and 
outstretched hands stirred, struck gravel, and feinted. 

The bounty hunter laughed out loud. 'Death,' he repeated. 'The little Rat wants to die!' 

He turned slowly on the spot, not falling for the trap of the semicircle. But it didn't matter 
to Ciri. She seethed with anger and hatred, trembling with lust for murder. She wanted to 
throw herself at this terrible old man, wanted to feel the blade pierce his body. Wanted to see 
his blood as it oozed from slashed arteries in the rhythm of the heartbeat. 

'Well, Rat.' Bonhart lifted the sword and spit on the edge. 'Before you croak, show me 
what you've got! Play music!' 

 

*** 

 

Six days later, Nycklar, the son of the coffin maker, told the story, 'I really don't know 
how it was that they didn't kill each other at that first meeting. They certainly wanted to kill, 
you could tell. She, he, both of them. They pounced on each other and crossed swords. They 
might have exchanged two or three blows every instant. There was nobody who could count 
them by eye nor ear. They struck so fast, my lord, that it was indistinguishable. And they 
danced and jumped around each other like two weasels!' 

Stefan Skellen, called The Owl, listened intently as he played with his riding whip. 

'They jumped away from each other,' continued the lad, 'and no one had a scratch. The 
Rat, you could tell, was mad as the devil and hissed like a cat who's had its mouse taken 
away. But Mr. Bonhart was very quiet.' 

 

*** 

 


'Falka' Bonhart grinned, baring his teeth like a real ghoul. 'You really understand how to 
dance and handle a sword! You've made me curious girl. Who are you? Tell me before you 
die.' 

Ciri breathed heavily. She recognized the feeling of terror. She understood what she had 
to do. 

'Tell me who you are, and I'll spare your life.' 

She gripped her sword handle tighter. She had to penetrate his display and take him 
before he covered himself. She could not let him retaliate against her blows; she could not 
parry his blows without once more risking the pain and paralysis that had seized her elbow 
and forearm. She could not waste energy trying to dodge his blows, which only missed by a 
hair's breadth. Bypass his coverage, she thought. Immediately. In this meeting. Or die. 

'You will die, Rat,' he said, and thrust his sword forward towards her. 'Are not you 
afraid? That's because you do not know what death looks like.' 

Kaer Morhen, she thought as she jumped. Lambert. The comb. Salto. 

She took three steps and performed a half-pirouette. When he attacked, ignoring the ruse, 
she did a back flip, letting herself fall into a squatting position, and pounced on him, dodged 
under his blade and twisted her wrist to deliver a powerful blow, supported by a strong 
rotation of the hip. Euphoria suddenly seized her; already she could almost feel the blade 
biting into his body. 

Instead, there was a hard, piercing clang of metal on metal. And a sudden flash in her 
eyes, shock and pain. She felt as if she had fallen. He's parried back and beaten me, she 
thought. I'm dying, she thought. 

Bonhart kicked her in the stomach. With a second kick, accurately targeted at her hurt 
elbow, he knocked the sword away from her hand. Ciri clutched her head, feeling a dull pain, 
but there was no wound under her fingers, no blood. I've taken a blow from his fist, she 
thought in horror. Only from his fist. Or from the sword hilt. He has not killed me. I was 
thrashed like a brat. 

She opened her eyes. 

The bounty hunter stood over her. Thin as a skeleton, he towered over her like a sick 
deciduous tree. He stank of sweat and blood. 

He grabbed her by the hair, pulled her, and forced her to stand up. Immediately he 
dragged her away, screaming, to the wall Mistle was lying by. 

'So you do not fear death?' He growled and pushed her head down. 'Then look at that 
little Rat. This is death. This is how one dies. Look, there's guts. This is blood. And that's 
shit, which she used to have inside of her.' 


Ciri squirmed and writhed, but his hand held her in place and before long her only 
movements were twitching and dry retching. Mistle was still alive, but her eyes were dull and 
glassy, like a fish. Her hand – like a hawk's talon – opened and closed, buried in mud and 
faeces. Ciri smelled the sharp, penetrating odour of urine. 

Bonhart laughed out loud. 'This little Rat is dying. In her own piss!' 

He let go of her hair. Ciri slumped down to her hands and feet, shaking with sobs. Mistle 
was right beside her. Mistle's hand, the slender, delicate, soft, clever hands of Mistle... 

...did not move. 

 

*** 

 

'He did not kill me. He tied me to the hitching posts, by both hands.' 

Vysogota sat there motionless. He had been sitting similarly for a while now. He even 
held his breath. Ciri went on with her story, but her voice was increasingly dull, increasingly 
unnatural and increasingly uncomfortable. 

'He told those who gathered that they should bring him a bag of salt and a small barrel of 
vinegar. And a saw. I did not know... I couldn't understand what he was doing. I was tied 
up... at the hitching posts... He called some servants and ordered them to hold me by the 
hair... and eyelids. He showed them how... So that I could neither turn my head away nor 
close my eyes. So I had to watch what he was doing. He must make sure that the goods didn't 
go bad, he said. That they did not decompose...' 

Ciri's voice cracked, her words stuck in her dry throat. Vysogota, who knew at once what 
he was about to hear, felt the bile rising in his throat like a flood. 

'He cut their heads off,' Ciri said flatly. 'With a saw. Giselher, Kayleigh, Asse, Reef, 
Spark... And Mistle. He cut off their heads... One by one. Before my eyes.' 

 

*** 

 

If someone managed to sneak into the secret heart of the swamp and find the hut with the 
moss thatched roof, if they had peeked through the cracks in the shutters, they would have 
seen, in the dimly lit interior, a gray-bearded old man in a sheepskin coat and a girl with ash-
blonde hair, whose face was disfigured by a scar on her cheek. They would have seen how 
the girl was shaking from fits of crying, as she sobbed in the arms of the old man, who tried 
to reassure her by clumsily stroking her hair and patting her quivering shoulders. 


But that was not possible. No one could see that. The hut was well hidden in the reeds of 
the marsh. In an eternally shrouded fog desert that no one dared enter. 

 

*** 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


I'm often asked how it came to be that I decided to write down my memories. Many people 
are curious about the moment in which my memoirs had their origin – namely, the facts and 
circumstances regarding the event that is also the beginning of the transcript, and the 
catalyst that accompanied it. In the past I have given various false explanations and have lied 
many times, but I now want the truth be told, because today my hair is white and worn thin, 
and I know that the truth is a precious grain, whereas the lie is useless chaff. 

 But the truth is that the incident that was the catalyst for those first notes, from which my 
work later began, was a coincidence – namely that a pencil and paper were among the things 
my companions and I had stolen from the camp of the troops of Lyria. And so it came to 
pass... 

 

Dandelion 

Half a Century of Poetry 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


