Chapter Eleven 

 

 

The initiates stood motionless before the High Priestess, straight, tense, silent, and a little 
pale. They were ready for the road, prepared to the smallest details. Grey, men's clothing for 
travel, warm, but not constricting jackets, comfortable elven boots. Their hair was cut short or 
styled so that it would not interfere with their work and they could easily keep marching in 
order. Their small knapsacks were packed only with food and the necessary equipment for 
the journey. The Army would supply everything else. The army for which they had 
volunteered. 

The faces of the girls were calm. Seemingly. Triss Merigold noticed the two girls' slightly 
trembling hands and lips. 

The wind blew through the bare branches of trees in the Temple Park. Rotted leaves 
drifted over the boards of the courtyard. The sky was indigo blue. There was snow in the air. 
You could smell it. 

Nenneke broke the silence. 'Have you been assigned?' 

'Not me,' murmured Eurneid. 'For now I'm to spend the winter in a camp near Vizima. 
The Advertising Commissioner said the mercenary units from the north will be situated there 
until spring... I am to be a field surgeon's assistant for these units.' 

'But I' – Iola the Second smiled palely – 'I have already been assigned. To the field 
surgeon Mr. Milo Vanderbeck.' 

'I trust that you will not bring any disgrace to me.' Nenneke fixed both initiates with a 
stern, thoughtful look. 'To me, to the temple, or to the name of the Great Melitele.' 

'Certainly not, Mother.' 

'And make sure you get enough sleep.' 

'Yes, Mother.' 

'You'll be up 'til you drop, working with the wounded, unable to sleep. You're going to 
doubt, going to be afraid of looking on pain and death. And then you find it easy to cope by 
using a narcotic or a stimulant. Be careful.' 

'We know, Mother.' 

'War, fear, murder, and blood' – the High Priestess pierced both of them with her eyes – 
'mean moral decline, and on top of that, it is a strong aphrodisiac for some. How it will affect 
you, you brats, you cannot currently know. Please tell me you will be careful. And if it does 
come to something, you should take a contraceptive. Nevertheless, if one of you gets into 


trouble, then make a wide detour of the quacks and village women! Seek a temple, and most 
preferably a sorceress.' 

'We know, Mother.' 

'That's all. It's time now for you to get your blessing.' 

One after the other, she put her hand on their heads, hugged them, and kissed them. 
Eurneid sniffed. Iola the Second started blubbering. Although her own eyes glistened a little 
more than usual, Nenneke snorted. 'No scenes, no scenes,' she said sharply and started to 
bristle. 'You go into an ordinary war. And you will come back. Take your belongings, and 
farewell.' 

'Farewell, Mother.' 

They left the temple at a brisk pace, not looking back. They followed the two girls with 
their eyes – the High Priestess Nenneke, the sorceress Triss Merigold, and the scribe Jarre. 

The latter gave a strong, meaningful cough. 

'What?' Nenneke looked sideways at him. 

'You allowed it!' The young man muttered bitterly. 'You allowed the girls to sign up! 
And I? Why can I not? Should I continue to turn over musty parchments, here within these 
walls? I am neither a cripple nor a coward! It is a shameful for me to sit in the temple, when 
even the girls'...' 

'Those girls,' interrupted the High Priestess, 'have spent their entire young lives learning 
to heal people and to care for the sick and wounded. They do not go to war out of patriotism 
or love of adventure, but because there will be countless wounded and sick to care for. A 
mountain of work, day and night! Eurneid and Iola, Myrrhe, Katje, Prune, Deborah, and the 
other girls are the Temple's contribution to the war. The Temple, as part of this society, 
contributes to the society. It contributes trained specialists to the army and the war. Do you 
understand that, Jarre? Specialists! Not animals for the slaughter!' 

'Everyone joins the army! Only cowards stay at home!' 

'You're talking rubbish, Jarre,' Triss said sharply. 'You understand nothing.' 

'I want to go to war...' The lad's voice broke. 'I want to... save Ciri...' 

'Please,' Nenneke said mockingly. 'The knight wants to rush to the rescue of his. On a 
white horse...' 

They fell silent under the gaze of the enchantress. 

'And now, I've had enough of this Jarre,' her look almost shattered the young man. 'I 
have told you, I will not allow it! Back to the books! Learn. Your future is science. Come, 
Triss. Let's not waste any time.' 


 

*** 

 

A canvas was spread in front of the altar. On it laid a bone comb, a cheap little ring, a 
shabby book cover, and a faded blue sash. Iola the First, a priestess with the second sight, 
leaned over the object. 

'Hurry not, Iola,' warned Nenneke, who was standing next to her. 'Concentrate slowly. 
We do not want a flash of prophecy, not a puzzle with thousands of solutions. We want a 
picture. A clear picture. Take on the aura of these things, they have heard Ciri, Ciri has 
touched them. Take on the aura. Slowly. There is no hurry.' 

Outside the wind howled and snowflakes clumped together. The roof and courtyard of the 
temple were quickly covered the snow. It was the nineteenth day of November. The full 
moon. 

'I am ready, mother,' said Iola the First with her melodic voice. 

'Go ahead.' 

'Wait a minute.' Triss rose from the bench like a spring and threw the chinchilla fur coat 
from her shoulders. 'One moment, Nenneke. I want to go into a trance along with her.' 

'That is dangerous.' 

'I know. But I want to see. With my own eyes. I owe her. Ciri... I love this girl like a little 
sister. In Kaedwen she saved my life, while risking her own head...' The voice of the 
enchantress suddenly broke. 

The High Priestess shook her head. 'Just like Jarre. Rushing to the rescue, blindly, 
headlong, without knowing where or why. But Jarre is a naive lad. You're an adult and, 
supposedly, should be wise magician. You should know that you cannot help Ciri by going 
into a trance. What you can do is hurt yourself.' 

'I will go along with Iola in a trance,' repeated Triss as she bit her lip. 'Allow me to 
Nenneke. By the way, what do I risk it? An epileptic seizure? Even if that happened, you'd 
get me out.' 

'You risk,' said Nenneke slowly, 'seeing something that you must not see.' 

The thought of Sodden Hill filled Triss with horror. Where I am dead. Where I am buried 
and my name is carved into the obelisk monument. The hill and the grave that will someday 
memorialize me. 

I know that. It has been prophesized to me. 

'I've made up my mind,' she said coolly and patiently, as she stood up and stroked her 


beautiful hair behind her neck with both hands. 'Let us begin.' 

Nenneke knelt down and rested her forehead in her folded hands. 

'Let us begin,' she said quietly. 'Get ready, Iola. Kneel down beside me, Triss. Take Iola 
by the hand. 

Outside it was night. The wind howled, the snow fell. 

 

*** 

 

In the south, beyond the Amell Mountains in Metinna, in the countryside called Hundred 
Lakes, a place that was five hundred miles away in a straight line from the city of Ellander 
and the Temple of Melitele, a nightmare frightened the fisherman Gosta. Awake, Gosta could 
not remember the content of the dream, but a strange restlessness left him unable to sleep. 

Any fisherman who knows his business, knows that you can only catch perch at first ice. 

This year's winter, although unexpectedly early, played pranks and was moody like a 
beautiful and successful woman. The first frost and snow had come like a thief in a 
treacherous ambush, in early November, just after Saovine, because no one had reckoned on 
snow and frost that early and there was still plenty of work to do. The lakes were covered 
with a thin layer of ice, and by mid-November it seemed that it could bear the weight of a 
man, but the moody winter suddenly backed away – it was autumn again and the rain 
softened the ice sheet as a warm south wind jumped over the shore and melted the drifts. 
What the hell, wondered the country people, it is now winter, or is not? 

It lasted for a mere three days, and then winter came back. This time it came without 
snow, but seized the frost like a blacksmith with his tongs. It cracked. The water dripping 
from the edges of the roofs became the sharp teeth of the icicles overnight, and the startled 
ducks were frozen by a hair in the duck ponds. 

And the lakes of Mil Trachta groaned and solidified into ice. 

Gosta waited a day for safety, then took the box from the attic with the fishing equipment 
that he would carry on a strap over his shoulder. He stuffed his boots properly with straw, put 
on his fur coat, took his ice pick, packed his bag, and hurried to the lake. 

As we know, you can only catch perch at first ice. 

The ice was strong. It bent a little as it bore the weight of the man, cracked a little, but it 
held. Gosta walked freely over the surface, struck a hole in the ice with his pick, sat on the 
box, wrapped the line made from horsehair around a short rod of larch wood, tied the fishing 
hook onto the line, and hung it in the water. The first perch, half a yard long, bit even before 
the hook had dropped and the line was clamped. 


After an hour had passed, a good half hundred green, striped fish with blood-red fins lay 
around the hole in the ice. Gosta had more perch than he needed, but the fishing fever did not 
leave him. In the end, he could distribute the fish to the neighbours. 

He heard a long snort. 

He looked up from the hole in the ice. A splendid black horse stood on the shore of the 
lake, hit steam shooting from its nostrils. Its rider was wearing muskrat fur and had covered 
his face with a scarf. 

Gosta swallowed. It was too late to escape. He secretly hoped, however, that the rider 
would not dare to walk on the thin ice with the horse. 

He was still mechanically moving the rod, and a perch jerked on the line. The fisherman 
pulled it out, removed the hook, and threw it onto the ice. From the corner of his eye he saw 
the rider jump out of the saddle, toss the reins over a barren bush, and cautiously approach 
the ice. The perch floundered on the ice, spreading its spiky tail and moving its gills. Gosta 
stood up and bent over for the pick, which could serve as a weapon if needed. 

'Do not worry.' 

It was a girl. Now that she took off the scarf, he saw her face disfigured by an ugly scar. 
She carried a sword on her back, he could see the beautifully carved handle that towered over 
her shoulder. 

'I will not harm you,' she said softly. 'I just want to ask for directions.' 

To where? Gosta thought. Now, in the winter. After the frost. Who travels in winter? Only 
a bandit. Or a necromancer. 

'Is this region the Mil Trachta?' 

'Yes...' he muttered, his eyes directed to the hole in the ice, into the black water. 'Mil 
Trachta. But here we say Hundred Lakes.' 

'And the lake Tarn Mira? Do you know of that?' 

'All know of it.' He looked anxiously at the girl. 'Only here we call it Bottomless. A 
cursed lake. A hideous shoal... It has fairies that drown people. And ghosts live in the 
accursed ancient ruins.' 

He could see her green eyes flash. 

'There are ruins? A tower, perhaps?' 

'A tower?' He could not suppress a disparaging snort. 'A couple of stones on top of one 
another, covered with moss. A pile of rubble...' 

The perch was no longer struggling, it only moved its colourful striped gills. 


The girl looked at it thoughtfully. 'Death on the ice,' she said. 'There is something 
captivating about that.' 

'Huh?' 

'How far is it to the lake and the ruins? Which way do I ride?' 

He said it. Then he showed it. He even scratched it into the ice with the sharp end of the 
ice pick. She nodded her head and memorized it. The mare pounded its hooves on the ice 
lake, snorted, and blew steam out its nostrils. 

 

*** 

 

He watched as she moved away towards the western shore, galloped up the slope, and 
faded against the backdrop of leafless alders and birch, into the beautiful, enchanted forest, 
which was adorned with a coating of white frost. The black mare ran with indescribable 
elegance, sharp, but also lightweight. You could hardly hear the sound of its hooves against 
the frozen ground, and the snow barely rippled from the branches that they grazed. Running 
through this ancient and frost-covered enchanted forest, it did not appear to be an ordinary 
horse, but rather a magical horse. 

But perhaps it was an apparition? 

A demon on a ghost horse, a demon who had assumed the form of a girl with big green 
eyes and a disfigured face? 

Who, if not a demon, travelled in the winter? And asked for directions to haunted ruins? 

After they had ridden away, Gosta quickly packed up his belongings. On his way home, 
he walked through the woods. It was a detour, but reason and instinct warned him not to use 
the road. Reason told him that the girl was, after all, not a ghost, but a human. The black mare 
was not an apparition, but a horse. And those who ride alone on horseback through the 
wilderness in the winter are all too often pursued. 

An hour later the pursuers galloped along the forest path. Fourteen horses. 

 

*** 

 

Rience shook the silver box again, cursed, and beat it against his pommel in anger. But 
the Xenophon remained silent. How enchanted. 

'Magical bullshit,' commented Bonhart coldly. 'It's broken – the cheap fairground trick.' 


'Or Vilgefortz is demonstrating how important we really are to him,' added Stefan 
Skellen. 

Rience raised his head and measured both of them with evil eyes. 'Thanks to this 
fairground trick,' he noted sharply, 'we are on the track and will no longer lose her. Thanks to 
Master. Vilgefortz we know where the girl wants to go. We know where we are riding and 
what we are doing. I think that's a lot. Compared to what you've done over the past month.' 

'Don't talk so much. Well, Boreas? What do the tracks say?' 

Boreas Mun sat up and cleared his throat. 'She was here an hour before us. Where she 
can, she tries to ride fast. But this is difficult terrain. Even on that incredible mare she isn't 
more than five or six miles ahead of us.' 

'She travels to the lake so resolutely', murmured Skellen. 'Vilgefortz was right. And I did 
not believe him...' 

'I didn't either,' confessed Bonhart. 'But only up to the moment yesterday when the 
farmers confirmed that some magical building actually is on the shore of Lake Tarn Mira.' 

The horses snorted and steam ran through their nostrils. The Owl looked over his left 
shoulder at Joanna Selborne. He had not liked the facial expression on the telepath the past 
couple days. I'm getting worried, he thought. This chase has exhausted all of us, physically 
and mentally. It's time to stop. High time. 

A cold shiver ran down his spine. He remembered the dream he had last night. 

'All right!' He pulled himself together. 'Enough talking. To the horses!' 

 

*** 

 

Boreas Mun hung from the saddle, on the lookout for signs. It was not easy. The ground 
was frozen hard and the loose, quickly-windswept snow remained only in furrows and 
depressions. Boreas was looking for the shoe prints of the black mare. He had to be extremely 
careful that he did not lose the trail, especially now that the urgency of the silver box's 
magical voice was silent and there was no more advice or information. 

He was inhumanly exhausted. And worried. They had pursued the girl for nearly three 
weeks – since Saovine, since the massacre at Dun Dare. Almost three weeks in the saddle, 
always on the chase. And all this time neither the girl nor the black mare had showed 
weakness or slowed down. 

Boreas Mun was on the lookout for signs. 

His thoughts constantly returned to the dream he had last night. In the dream he was 


bogged down, sunken. The black surface had closed over his head as he sank to the bottom 
and cold water penetrated his throat and lungs. He had woken up soaked in a hot sweat – 
although all around there had been a true freezing chill. 

That's enough, he thought as he was hanging from the saddle, on the lookout for signs. 
It's high time to stop. 

 

*** 

 

'Master? Can you hear me? Master?' 

The enchanted Xenophon was silent. 

Rience's shoulders shivered violently as he breathed into his clammy hands. The bitter 
cold bit his neck, back, and aching loins. Every movement brought pain to his mind. He had 
even lost the desire to curse. 

Almost three weeks in the saddle, on a relentless chase. In penetrating cold. And for a few 
days with frost setting. 

And Vilgefortz was silent. 

We are also silent. And look at each other askance. Rience rubbed his hands and put on 
his gloves. Skellen, he thought, looks at me strangely. Is he planning some treachery? He 
reached agreement with Vilgefortz a little too quickly and a little too easily... But this squad, 
these thugs who are so loyal to him, carry out his orders. If we get a hold of the girl, he is 
capable of ignoring the deal, killing her, and using these conspirators of his to carry out his 
crazy ideas of democracy and civil rule. 

Or maybe Skellen has already had enough of the conspiracy? As a born conformist and 
opportunist maybe he is now thinking it's better to bring the girl to Emperor Emhyr? 

He looks at me strangely. Like an owl. And the whole squad... That Kenna Selborne... 

And Bonhart? Bonhart is an unpredictable sadist. When he speaks of Ciri, his voice 
trembles with anger. Depending on the discretion he would execute or kidnap the girl, to 
make her fight in the arena. The deal with Vilgefortz? That agreement will not matter to him. 
Especially now that Vilgefortz... 

He took out the Xenophon. 'Master? Can you hear me? It is Rience...' 

The machine was silent. Rience didn't even curse. 

Vilgefortz is silent. Skellen and Bonhart have made an agreement with him. But in a day 
or two when we catch up to the girl it may turn out that there is no agreement. And then I will 
be the one to get a knife in the throat. Or made to ride in shackles to Nilfgaard, as the Owl's 


proof and pledge of loyalty... 

Damn it! 

Vilgefortz is silent. He does not give advice. Does not show the way. Does not scatter 
doubts with his calm, logical, true to the depths of his soul voice. He is silent. 

Perhaps Skellen was right? Perhaps Vilgefortz really has turned to something else and 
does not care about us and our destiny? 

For all the devils, I did not think this would happen. If I had known this, I would not 
have... I would have ridden to kill the witcher instead of Schirru... Damn it! I'm freezing out 
here and Schirru is surely sitting in the warmth... 

When I think that I myself urged that I be sent after Ciri and Schirru be sent after the 
witcher... I myself asked for it. 

Back then, in the beginning of September, when Yennefer fell into our hands. 

 

*** 

 

The world that had just been a surreal, soft, muddy, sticky blackness, turned to solid 
surfaces and contours in a split second. If it was bright. It was real. 

Yennefer opened her eyes, shaken by convulsive tremors. She was lying on rocks, down 
the middle of corpses, rigging, and tarred boards – the remnants of the dragon boat 'Alcyone'. 
All around, she saw feet. Feet in heavy boots. One of these boots had kicked her to 
consciousness a moment ago. 

'Get up, witch!' 

Again a kick brought pain that penetrated to her roots. Then she saw a face bend over 
hers. 

'Get up, I said! On your feet! Do you recognize me?' 

She blinked. She recognized him. Because she had once burned his face as he fled 
through a teleport in front of her. Rience. 

'We will settle,' he promised. 'We will settle everything, you whore. I will teach you 
what pain is. With these hands and with these fingers, I will teach you what pain is.' 

She tensed, clenched her fists, and opened them again, about to cast a spell. And 
immediately they writhed together. She choked, gasped, and shook. 

Rience roared with laughter. 'Not working?' She heard. 'You do not have even trace 


power! You are no equal with Vilgefortz at spells! He has squeezed it all out from you, to the 
last drop, as the whey from the cheese. You cannot even...' 

He did not finish. Yennefer drew the stiletto from the sheath fixed to the inside of her leg, 
jumped up like a cat, and pushed blindly. She did not succeed, the blade only grazed its goal, 
tearing the fabric of his pants. Rience jumped back and fell down. 

Immediately a hail of punches and kicks rained down on her. She howled as a heavy boot 
stomped the dagger from her hand and pressed down, crushing her thumb. Another boot 
stomped onto her abdomen. The sorceress was writhing and gasping. She was torn from the 
ground and her arms were twisted behind her back. She saw a fist flying towards her and the 
world suddenly flared up in sparks as her face exploded in pain. It ran down her spine into 
her abdomen and womb. Her knees turned to soft jelly. She hung powerlessly in the hands 
that held her. Someone grabbed her by the hair, yanking her head up. She took another blow 
to the eye, and everything blurred and disappeared in a blinding flash. 

She did not faint. She felt. She was being beaten. Violently beaten, cruelly, beaten like a 
man. With blows that were not only painful, but also drained you of energy, beat out any will 
to resist. She was beaten and twitched in the steely grip of many hands. 

She wanted to faint, but could not. She felt. 

'Enough,' she suddenly heard from far away, passing through the veil of pain. 'Have you 
gone mad, Rience? Are you trying to kill her? I need her alive.' 

'I promised her, master,' growled the wavering shadow in front of her, which gradually 
became the shape and face of Rience. 'I promised her that I'd get back at her... With these 
hands...' 

'I care little what you promised. I repeat, I need her alive and able to articulate speech.' 

'Neither a cat nor a witch,' said the one who held her by the hair, laughing, 'can have the 
life beaten out of them so easily.' 

'No voice wise speeches, Schirru. I said that is enough beating. Raise her head high. How 
are you, Yennefer?' 

The sorceress spat out red and lifted her swelling face. At first she did not recognize him. 
He wore a mask that covered the entire left side of his head. But she knew who it was. 

'Go to hell, Vilgefortz,' she stammered as she gently touched her tongue to her front teeth 
and bruised lips. 

'How do you like my spell? Did you like it, as I lifted you up along with this boat from 
the sea? Did you enjoy the flight? Which spells did you place on yourself that you have 
managed to survive the fall?' 

'Go to hell.' 


'Destroy the star necklace around her throat. And take her to the laboratory. We will not 
waste any time.' 

She was dragged, pulled, and sometimes carried. Over a stony plain that held the smashed 
pieces of the 'Alcyone'. And remainder of many other wrecks, their towering frames like the 
ribs of the skeletons of sea monsters. Crach was right, she thought. The ships that have 
disappeared without trace over the Sedna-depth were not victims of natural disasters. Gods... 
Pavetta and Duny... 

A distant mountain peak rose above the horizon in the cloud-covered sky. 

Then came walls, gates, cloisters and stairs. Everything was somehow strangely and 
unnaturally large... There were still too few details for here to be able to orient herself, to 
know where she was, where she had fallen, where the spell had brought them. Her swollen 
face made it even more difficult to observe. Smell had become her sole sense that provided 
information – she immediately smelled formalin, ether, and alcohol. And magic. The odours 
of a laboratory. 

She was brutally placed on a steel chair. Cold clamps closed painfully on her wrists and 
ankles. After the steel jaws of a vice were fixed to her temples, trapping her head, she looked 
around the spacious and dazzlingly brightly lit room. She saw another chair, a strange steel 
structure on a stone pedestal. 

'That,' she heard Vilgefortz's voice behind her . 'That little chair is for your Ciri. It has 
waited a long time, it can wait no longer. Me neither.' 

She could tell he was close, could almost feel his breath. He pushed needles into her scalp 
and stuck something firmly to her ear lobe. Then he stood before her and took off his mask. 
Yennefer sighed involuntarily. 

'This is the work of that very same Ciri,' he said, pointing to the once classically 
beautiful, now horribly ravaged face that was framed by gold clasps and retainers that held a 
multi-faceted crystal in the left eye socket. 'I tried to catch her when she entered the portal in 
the Tower of Gulls,' said the sorcerer quietly. 'I wanted to save her life, I was sure the portal 
would kill her. How naive I was! She went through smoothly, with such force that portal 
broke and exploded in my face. I lost an eye and my left cheek, and a lot of skin on my face, 
neck and chest. It was very unpleasant, very tedious, and very complicated. And it is very 
ugly, is not it? Ha, you should have seen me before I started to magically regenerate.' 

'If I believed in that sort of thing,' he said while pushing a curved metal tube into her 
nose, 'I might think this is the revenge of Lydia van Bredevoort. From beyond the grave. I 
can regenerate, but slowly. It is time-consuming and laborious. Especially with the 
regeneration of the eyeball, there are problems... The crystal I have in my eye socket serves 
its purpose well – I see three dimensions, but the lack of a natural eyeball sometimes really 
drives me to despair. Indeed, I've developed an irrational anger – I swear that when I capture 
Ciri, immediately afterwards I'll instruct Rience to remove one of those big green eyes. With 
his fingers. These fingers, as he likes to say. You are silent, Yennefer? But you already know 


that I desire to tear one of your eyes out as well? Or both eyes?' 

He pushed thick needles into the veins at the top of her hands. Sometimes he did not find 
his mark, instead hitting the bone. Yennefer gritted teeth. 

'You've made trouble for me. Forced me to stop working. Put me in danger. When you 
sailed your boat on the Sedna-Deep, beneath my extractors... The echo of our brief duel was 
strong and widespread, it may be noticed by uninvited and perky ears. But I could not help 
myself. The idea that I could have you here, that I could link you to my Orter, was too 
tempting.' 

'Because surely you did not think' – he put in the next needle – 'that I had fallen for 
your provocation? That I had taken the bait? No, Yennefer. If you believe that, you are 
confusing the sky with the stars which are reflected in the pond at night. Truthfully, I should 
thank you – you tracked me down. When you went to the Depth, you made my task easier. 
Because I, you see, cannot locate Ciri, not even with the help of this device here, which has 
no equal. The girl has strong innate protective mechanisms – a strong anti-magic aura and 
screening. After all, she is of the elder blood... Nevertheless, my Super-Orter should have 
discovered her. But it could not.' 

Yennefer was quite enmeshed in a web of silver and copper wires, surrounded by a 
scaffolding of tubes made of silver and porcelain. Tripods mounted on the chair held glass 
vials that fluctuated with colourless liquids. 

'I've therefore concluded' – Vilgefortz pushed another tube into her nose, this time it was 
made of glass – 'that the only way to locate Ciri is an empathic probe. For this, however, I 
needed someone with whom the girl had a sufficiently strong emotional connection and has 
developed an empathic matrix algorithm and mutual sympathy, to borrow a neologism. I 
thought of the witcher, but he has vanished, and also witchers are unsuitable to use as 
mediums. I was about to abduct Triss Merigold, our Fourteenth of the Hill. I have considered 
the kidnapping of Nenneke from Ellander... But then came along Yennefer of Vengerberg, 
you almost volunteered... Really, I could not have hoped for anyone better... Connected to the 
apparatus, you will locate Ciri for me. The operation, however, requires cooperation on your 
part... But there are, as you know, means to force someone to cooperate.' 

'Of course,' he continued as he wiped his hands, 'you should get a few explanations. For 
example – where and how did I learn of the elder blood? Lara Dorren's heritage? What 
exactly is this gene? How is it that Ciri has it? Who did she inherit it from? In what way will I 
get it from her, and what am I going to use it for? How does the Sedna Extractor, which I 
pulled you through, work and what is its purpose? A lot of questions, are there not it? But 
unfortunately, I lack the time to tell you of anything to explain everything. Ha, it's a shame 
because I'm sure you'd be amazed by some of the facts, Yennefer... But, as I said, I do not 
have time. The elixirs are beginning to take effect. It is time that you begin to concentrate.' 

The sorceress gritted her teeth, gasped, and made deep, muffled groans. 

'I know.' Vilgefortz nodded. He drew a large, professional megascope closer and 


monitored a large crystal ball on a tripod, surrounded by a silver cobweb of wires. 'I know, 
but this is very regrettably required. And very painful. The sooner you start with the 
locations, the sooner it's over. Well, Yennefer. Here on this screen, I want to see Ciri. Where 
she is, whom she is with and what she is doing, along with where and with whom she is 
sleeping.' 

Yennefer screamed piercingly, wildly, desperately. 

'It hurts,' Vilgefortz fixed both his living eye the dead crystal eye on her. 'Certainly, it 
hurts. Locations Yennefer. Do not block yourself. Do not play the heroine. You know that 
you cannot stand it. The result of the resistance can be distressing, it can lead to a cerebral 
haemorrhage, you could get a double-sided paralysis, or enter a vegetable state for the rest of 
your life. Locations!' 

She clenched her jaw until her teeth began to crack. 

'Well, Yennefer' the magician said gently. 'At least out of curiosity! You must be curious 
about how your student is coping. Perhaps she faces a threat? Maybe she is in trouble? You 
know how many people want Ciri's death. Locations. If I know where the girl is, I'll get it 
there. She will be safe... no one will find her here. No one.' 

His voice was velvety and warm. 

'Locations Yennefer. Locations. I beg you. I give you my word: I will only take from Ciri 
what I need. And then I'll give you both your freedom. I swear it.' 

Yennefer gritted her teeth even more. A trail of blood flowed over her chin. 

Vilgefortz abruptly stood up and waved his hand. 'Rience!' 

Yennefer felt a device being attached to her hands and fingers. 

'Sometimes,' said Vilgefortz bent over her, 'there are stubborn situations in which magic, 
potions, and narcotics simply cannot substitute, good old, classic pain. Do not make me do 
so. Locations.' 

'Go to hell, Vilgefortz!' 

'Pull the screws, Rience. Slowly.' 

 

*** 

 

Vilgefortz looked at the unconscious body being dragged across the floor towards the 
stairs that led into the dungeon. Then he looked up at Rience and Schirru. 

'There is always a risk,' he said, 'that one of you falls into the hands of my enemies and is 


interrogated. I would like to believe that you would be as strong minded as her under the 
screws. Yes, I would like to believe that. But I do not.' 

Rience and Schirru remained silent. Vilgefortz turned again to the megascope, where an 
image appeared on the screen, produced by the giant crystal. 

'That's all she located,' he said, pointing at the screen. 'I wanted Cirilla and she has given 
me the witcher. She did not have the empathic matrix of the girl, but when she became weak 
she gave me Geralt's. I would not have believed she had such deep feelings for him... Well, I 
am satisfied with what we have initially learned. The witcher, Cahir aep Ceallach, the poet 
Dandelion, and a woman? Hmmm... Who will take this job? The final solution to the witcher 
question?' 

 

*** 

 

It was assigned to Schirru, Rience recalled as he shifted himself in the stirrups to gain a 
moments relief from his aching, saddle-sore buttocks. Schirru volunteered to kill the witcher. 
He knew the area where Yennefer had detected Geralt and his company – he had friends or 
relatives there. I, however, Vilgefortz sent to the negotiation with Vattier de Rideaux, and 
then to track down Skellen and Bonhart... 

And I was a fool then, happy because I was sure I had fallen to the far easier and more 
enjoyable task. And one that I could finish quickly, easily, and with pleasure... 

 

*** 

 

'If the farmers did not lie' – Stefan Skellen stood in his stirrups – 'then the lake is behind 
that hill there, in a valley.' 

'That's where the tracks lead', confirmed Boreas Mun. 

'Why are we still here?' Rience rubbed his cold, rigid ear. 'Spur the horses on, and let's 
go!' 

'Not so fast,' Bonhart held him back. 'We scout ahead. Including the valley. We do not 
know on which side of the lake she's riding on. If we take the wrong side, it can suddenly turn 
out that the lake separates us from her.' 

'Too true.' Boreas agreed with him. 

'The lake is frozen over.' 


'The ice may be too weak for horses. Bonhart is right, we have to divide our forces.' 

Skellen quickly gave the commands. The first group, a total of seven horses, led by 
Bonhart, Rience, and Ola Harsheim, galloped along the eastern shore and soon disappeared 
into the black forest. 

'Good,' said the Owl. 'Let's go, Silifant.' 

He immediately noticed that something was wrong. 

He turned his horse, drove it forward with a whip, and rode up to Joanna Selborne. 
Kenna's mount stepped back, but her face was like stone. 

'It's useless, Lord Coroner,' she said hoarsely. 'We tried to ride with you. We are turning 
around. We have had enough.' 

'We?' cried Dacre Silifant. 'Who is 'we'? What is this, a mutiny?' 

Skellen leaned over the saddle and spat on the frozen ground. Behind Kenna were Andres 
Vierny and Til Echrade, the bright-haired elf. 

'Lady Selborne,' the Owl snapped. 'It's not the point that you are ruining a promising 
career and ignoring the opportunity of a lifetime. The point is that you will be handed over to 
the hangman. Along with these fools who have listened to you.' 

'A man destined to hang can never drown,' Kenna replied philosophically. 'But you 
should not threaten us with the hangman, Lord Coroner. Because you do not know who is 
closer to the scaffold, you or us.' 

'You think so?' The Owl's eyes flashed. 'This is the cunning conclusion you came to by 
overhearing someone's smart thoughts? I'd thought you were wiser. But you're just a foolish 
woman. With me, you always win. Against me, you lose forever! Just remember that. And if 
you think I'm done for, realize I will still have an opportunity to send you to the scaffold. Do 
you all hear me? I'll have them tear the flesh from your bones with red-hot hooks!' 

'One dies only once, Lord Coroner,' said Til Echrade gently. 'You've chosen your path, 
we are choosing ours. Either way is risky and uncertain. And you do not know what fate has 
determined for either.' 

'You will not force us' – Kenna held her head proudly – 'to chase the girl like dogs, Lord 
Skellen. And we will not end up killed like dogs, as Neratin Ceka was. Oh, enough talk. We 
are turning around! Boreas! Come with us.' 

'No.' Boreas shook his head and pulled his fur cap over his forehead. 'Farewell, I wish 
you no harm. But I'll stay. I serve. I have sworn.' 

'Who?' Kenna frowned. 'The Emperor or the Owl? Or the magician who speaks out of 
the box?' 


'I am a soldier. I serve.' 

'Wait,' cried Duffi Kriel, who rode out behind Dacre Silifant's back. 'I'm coming with 
you. I have also had enough of this! Last night I dreamed of my own death. I do not want to 
die for this lousy and suspicious cause!' 

'Traitors,' yelled Dacre, red as a radish. It looked as if he might start spraying blood from 
his face. 'Treacherous, miserable dogs!' 

'Quiet.' The Owl was still glaring at Kenna. His eyes were as repulsive as those of the 
bird for which he was nicknamed. 'They have chosen their path, you heard them. There is 
nothing to do but shout and waste spit. But we'll meet one of these days. I promise you.' 

'Maybe even on the same scaffold,' Kenna said without irony. 'Because you, Skellen, will 
not be executed with the noble-born princes, but with us – the mob. But you are right, there's 
no use wasting spit. We ride. Good luck, Boreas. Take care, Mr. Silifant.' 

Dacre spat over his horse's head. 

 

*** 

 

'And that is everything I have to say' – Joanna Selborne raised her head proudly and 
stroked a dark lock of hair from her forehead – 'I have nothing to add, High Tribunal.' 

The chairman of the tribunal looked down on her from above. With his almost-gray eyes. 
His expression was inscrutable. 

Oh, what the heck, thought Kenna, I'll try. We only die once, all or nothing. I'm not going 
to rot in the citadel, waiting for death. The Owl spoke to the wind, which could take revenge 
even from the beyond the grave... 

What the heck! Maybe they won't notice it. All or nothing! 

She put her hand to her nose, as if to wipe something away. She looked into the chairman 
of the tribunal's almost-gray eyes. 

'Guard!' Said the chairman of the tribunal. 'Please return to the witness Selborne to...' 

He paused, then coughed. Suddenly sweat stood out on his forehead. 

'...to the law office,' he concluded and violently pulled air through his nose. 'Have the 
relevant documents issued. And release her. The witness Selborne is no longer required by 
the court.' 

Kenna secretly wiped away a drop of blood that ran from her nose. She smiled and 
thanked her magic with a slight bow. 


 

*** 

 

'They deserted?' Bonhart repeated incredulously. 'They just deserted? Simply rode away? 
Skellen? You allowed this?' 

'If they blow the whistle on us...' began Rience, but the Owl stopped him immediately. 
'They will not, because they love their own heads! After Kriel joined them, I had only Dacre 
and Mun, and they were four...' 

'Four,' said Bonhart maliciously 'is not so much. After we catch up with the girl, I'll ride 
for them. And the ravens will feed on them. In the name of certain principles.' 

'First of all, we must catch the girl,' the Owl interrupted and drove his gray horse forward 
with the whip. 'Boreas! Watch the road!' 

The bell shaped valley was filled with a dense fog, but they knew there would be a lake at 
the bottom, because this was Mil Trachta, and in the bottom of every valley here was a lake. 
However, they also knew because the black mare's hoof tracks had not been their only way to 
catch the girl – Vilgefortz had told them to seek this lake. He had accurately described it to 
them. And the name it was called. 

Tarn Mira. 

The lake was narrow, no wider than an arrow shot. It formed a slightly curved crescent 
between high, steep slopes, on which grew a forest of black spruce, beautifully dusted with 
white snow. It was silent on the slopes, not a sound could be heard. Even the crows were 
silent, whose ominous croaking had accompanied them for over a dozen days on the road. 

'This is the south end,' stated Bonhart. 'If the magician has not bungled and confused the 
thing, the magical tower should be located at the north end. Watch out for her tracks, Boreas! 
If we lose the trail, the lake could separate us from her!' 

'The tracks are clear,' cried Boreas Mun from below. 'And fresh! It leads to the lake!' 

'Forward.' Skellen grey horse shied in front of the steep slope, but he forced it under his 
control. 

'Down!' 

They rode down the slope, carefully holding back the snorting horses. They forced their 
way through the black, barren, icy bushes that blocked the way to the bank. 

Bonhart's brown cautiously stepped onto the ice, crunching the glass-smooth surface 
broken by protruding reeds. The ice began to crackle under its hooves and long cracks 
suddenly ran radially apart. 


'Get back!' Bonhart pulled the reins and turned the snorting beast towards the shore. 
'Dismount! The ice is too thin.' 

'Only on the bank, near the reeds,' estimated Dacre Silifant after he hit the ice with his 
heel. 'And even here it is one and a half inches thick. It will carry a horse, there is nothing to 
fear...' 

His words were drowned out by a curse and neighing. Skellen's gray horse slipped and 
fell on its hind legs, resulting in his legs sliding apart. Skellen swore again and hit the horse 
with his spurs. This time the curse was accompanied by the sharp cracking of ice bursting. 
The gray horse began to stamp its front feet as its rear collapsed. It struggled in the hole, 
breaking more ice and stirring up the bulging dark waters underneath. The Owl jumped out of 
the saddle and pulled on the reins, but slipped and fell down headlong. He was lucky that he 
did not fall under the hooves of his own horse. Two Gemmererians helped him to his feet, 
and Bert Brigden and Ola Harsheim drew the neighing gray horse to the shore. 

'Dismount, guys,' Bonhart repeated, looking into the fog that covered the lake. 'We do 
not want to take any risks. We will pursue the girl on foot. She will also have been forced to 
walk.' 

'Too true,' confirmed Boreas Mun as he pointed to the lake. 'You can see it.' 

On the shore, where branches hung over, the ice was smooth and semi-transparent, like 
dark glass bottles. They could see the brown reeds and other water plants beneath. Further 
out, however, the ice was covered by a thin layer of wet snow. And dark footprints stretched 
as far as the eye could see in the fog. 

'We have her!' Rience cried eagerly, throwing his reins over a tree. 'She's not as smart as 
she looks. She went onto the ice in the middle of the lake. If she would have chosen one of 
the banks, or the forest, it would have been much more difficult to catch her!' 

'In the middle of the lake...' repeated Bonhart with a thoughtful expression. 'The centre of 
the lake is the shortest and easiest path to this magical tower, so Vilgefortz told us. She 
knows it. Mun? How much advantage does she have?' 

Boreas Mun, who was already on the lake, knelt down by a boot print, bent down low, 
and looked. 

'Half an hour,' he estimated. 'No more. It's getting warmer, but the track has not blurred, 
you can see every nail in the sole.' 

'The lake,' murmured Bonhart, who tried in vain to penetrate the fog with his stare, 
'extends more than five miles to the north. That's what Vilgefortz said. If the girl has a half-
hour head start, she is about a mile ahead of us.' 

'On smooth ice?' Mun shook his head. 'No sir. Half a mile at most.' 

'All the better! March!' 


'March,' repeated the Owl. 'Watch the ice and march forward as quickly as possible!' 

They breathed heavily. The proximity of the victim excited them and filled them with 
enthusiasm like a narcotic. 

'Do not split up!' 

'Just do not lose the track...' 

'And don't get lost in this damn fog... As white as milk... you can't see more than twenty 
paces...' 

'Toward the pines,' growled Rience. 'Faster, faster! As long as there is snow on the ice 
we can follow her footsteps...' 

'The tracks are fresh,' Boreas Mun began to murmur suddenly. 'Very fresh... You can see 
every nail impression... She is directly in front of us... Directly in front of us! Why can we not 
see her?' 

'And why can we not hear her?'' Wondered Ola Harsheim. 'Our footsteps resound on the 
ice, the snow crunches! Why can we not hear her?' 

'Because you are prattling' Rience violently cut him off. 'Go on, march!' 

Boreas Mun took off his cap and wiped his sweaty brow. 'She's there in the fog,'' he said 
quietly. 

'Somewhere in the fog... And we cannot see. We cannot see where she will hit... like 
before... in Dun Dare... on the night of Saovine...' With a trembling hand he drew his sword 
from its sheath. 

The Owl jumped toward him, grabbed him by the shoulders, shook him vigorously. 'Stop 
causing a panic, old fool,' he hissed. 

It was already too late. The horror had infected the others. They also pulled their swords 
and stood instinctively so that they had a comrade at their backs. 

'She is no ghost!' Rience growled loudly. 'She's not even a magician! And we have ten 
men here! It was four at Dun Dare, and they were all drunk!' 

'Fan out' Bonhart said suddenly, 'form a line to the left and right. And act as a chain! But 
so that you do not lose sight of each other.' 

'You too?' Scoffed Rience. 'You have also caught the fear Bonhart? I thought you were 
for less superstitious.' 

The bounty hunter gave him a look that was colder than ice. 'Fan out the line,' he 
repeated, ignoring the magician. 'Keep this distance. I'm turning around, to pick up the 
horses.' 


'What?' 

Bonhart once again honoured Rience with no response. Rience cursed, but the Owl laid 
his hand on his shoulder. 'Leave him,' he hissed. 'Let him go. But let's not waste any time! 
Form a chain! Bert and Stigward, to the left! Ola, to the right...' 

'What for, Skellen?' 

'If we all travel in a cluster,' Boreas Mun murmured, 'we could break through the ice. 
Moreover, if we go as a chain, there is less danger that the girl will escape to the side 
somewhere.' 

'Side?' Rience said dismissively. 'How so? The tracks are clearly visible in front of us. 
The girl travels straight as an arrow, and if she did try to hit a hook, the track would betray 
her!' 

'Enough talk,' the Owl cut off the discussion then turned to look back into the fog where 
Bonhart had disappeared. 'Forward!' They went. 

 

*** 

 

'It is getting warmer...' gasped Boreas Mun. 'The ice is melting from above. It forms a 
layer of water...' 

'The fog is thick...' 

'But the tracks are still visible,' noted Dacre Silifant . 'Besides, I think the girl is moving 
slower. She is losing energy.' 

'So are we.' Rience tore his cap from his head and fanned the air. 

'Be still.' Silifant stopped suddenly. 'Did you hear that? What was that?' 

'I heard nothing.' 

'I did... a kind of crunching... a crunch on the ice... but not from there.' Boreas Mun was 
in the fog where the tracks disappeared. 'Somehow, from left, from the side...' 

'I also heard,' confirmed the Owl and looked around uneasily. 'But now it's quiet. Damn, 
I do not like this. I do not like it!' 

'The tracks!' Rience repeated with bored emphasis. 'We can still see her tracks! Have you 
no eyes? She goes straight. Straight! If she turned aside, even half a step, we would see it in 
the tracks! March, quickly, we almost have her! I guarantee we will see the same...' 

He broke off. Boreas Mun gave a moan that vibrated in his lungs. The Owl cursed. 


Ten paces in front of them, on the limit of visibility of the milk soup of fog they saw the 
tracks. They disappeared. 

'Hell and plague!' 

'What?' 

'Did she fly away, or what?' 

'No.' Boreas Mun shook his head. 'She's didn't fly away. Worse.' 

Rience swore vulgarly and pointed at the grooves cut in the ice. 

'Skates,' he growled and clenched his fists involuntarily. 'She had her skates and has put 
them on... Now she will fly like the wind over the ice... We will not catch her! Where the hell 
is Bonhart? Without horses we will not catch her!' 

Boreas Mun groaned loudly. 

Skellen slowly unbuttoned his coat and put his hand across the chest bandolier, making 
sure the line of Orions was easily accessible. 'We will not have to catch her,' he said coldly. 
'She will come to us. I'm afraid we will not have to wait long.' 

'Have you lost your mind?' 

'Bonhart foresaw this. That is why he turned around to get the horses. He knew the girl 
was luring us into a trap. Pay attention! Listening to the crunching of ice skates on the ice!' 

Dacre Silifant turned pale, it was noticeable in spite of his frost red cheeks. 

'Boys!' He shouted. 'Look out! Watch out! And form a heap, a cluster! Make sure you 
don't get lost in the fog!' 

'Be still!' Snapped the Owl. 'Be still! Absolute silence, or we will not hear...' 

They heard it. From left-most distant edge of the chain, beyond the fog, came a short, 
staccato cry. And a sharp, shrill squeak of ice that made their hair stand on end, like when 
you scratch iron on glass. 

'Bert,' cried the Owl. 'Bert! What's going on?' 

They heard an unintelligible scream, and immediately the head and neck of Bert Brigden 
ran out of the fog. When he was close, he slipped, fell, and slid across the ice on his belly. 

'She caught... Stigward,' he gasped, as he stood up with difficulty. 'Cut him down... in 
passing... So fast... I've never seen anything like it... a little sorceress...' 

Skellen cursed. Silifant and Mun, both with swords in hand, turned around and stared into 
the fog. 

Crunching. Crunching. Crunching. Fast. Rhythmically. More and more. Increasingly 


clear... 

'Where from?' Cried Boreas Mun, as he turned around and held the blade of the sword 
with both hands in the air. 'Where?' 

'Be still,' cried the Owl, an Orion in his raised hand. 'From the right! Yes! From the 
right! She is coming from the right! Watch out!' 

On the right wing a Gemmererian suddenly cursed, turned, and ran blindly into the fog 
slapping on the melting of ice. He did not get far, not even out of sight. They heard the sharp 
crunch of moving skates. They saw a blurred shade, scurrying along. And the flash of a 
sword. The Gemmererian howled. They saw him fall, saw the blood squirt wide onto the ice. 
The wounded man looked around, writhing, screaming, crying. Then he stopped and lay still. 

But even as he howled, the crunching sound of approaching ice skates came again. They 
had not expected that the girl could turn so quickly. 

She came in among them, exactly in the middle. She gave Ola Harsheim a passing cut, 
flat and below the knee. He folded up like a pocket knife. She whirled around in a pirouette 
and showered Boreas Mun with stabbing shards of ice. Skellen jumped back, slipped, and 
grabbed Rience on the sleeve. Both fell down. The skates crunched coldly next to them, 
spraying splinters in their faces. One of the Gemmererians screamed, cried, and broke off 
with a wild shriek. The Owl knew what had happened. He had heard a lot of people have 
their throats cut. 

Ola Harsheim screamed and crawled over to the ice. 

Crunching. Crunching. Crunching. 

Silence. 

'Stefan,' stammered Dacre Silifant. 'Stefan... You are our only hope... Save us... Let us 
not come to...' 

'She made me lame, the biiitch!' Shouted Ola Harsheim. 'Help me, damn it! Someooone 
help me!' 

'Bonhart' yelled Skellen into the fog. 'Bonhaaart! Heeeelp! Where are you, you son of a 
bitch? Bonhaaart!' 

'She surrounded us,' gasped Boreas Mun, as he turned and listened. 'She runs in the fog 
around us... and you do not know where she is going to strike... Death! This bitch is death! 
This is a massacre, as in Dun Dare, on the night of Saovine...' 

'Keep yourselves together,' groaned Skellen. 'Keep yourselves together, she preys on 
individuals... If you see her coming, do not lose your head... Throw your swords at her feet – 
backpacks, belts... whatever you can, so that she...' 

He did not finish. This time they did not even hear the crunch of ice skates. Dacre Silifant 


and Rience saved their lives by throwing themselves flat on the ice. Boreas Mun was able to 
jump away, but Bert Brigden slipped and was brought down. When the girl retreated, Skellen 
threw his Orion. He hit. But the wrong target. Ola Harsheim, who had finally been able to 
stand up, fell quivering on the bloody ice, and his wide-open eyes seemed to squint at the 
steel star that pierced him in the nose. 

The last of the Gemmererians threw away his sword and began to sob in short, jerky 
spasms. 

Skellen rushed to him and punched him with all his strength in the face. 'Pull yourself 
together,' he cried. 'Pull yourself together, man! It's only a girl! Only a little girl!' 

'In Dun Dare, on the night of Saovine,' Boreas Mun said quietly. 'We created this ice 
monster. We will not leave this lake. Listen! And hear how death is hastening to you.' 

Skellen picked up the Gemmererian's sword and tried to push it to the sobbing man's 
hand, but it was in vain. The Gemmererian, shaken by spasms, looked at him with dull eyes. 
The Owl let go of the sword and jumped towards Rience. 

'Do something, magician,' he roared, shaking him by the shoulders. The horror doubled 
his strength; although Rience was bigger, heavier, and bulkier, he shook like a rag doll in 
Skellen's grip. 'Do something! Call your mighty Vilgefortz! Or do some magic yourself! Say 
a spell, call spirits, summon demons! Do something, anything, you dirty scum, you 
dungheap! Do something before this ghost kills us all!' 

His cry echoed back from the wooded slopes. Before the echo had stopped, the crunching 
of skates could once again be heard. The sobbing Gemmererian fell to his knees and covered 
his face with his hands. Bert Brigden howled, threw away his sword and turned to flee. He 
slipped, fell down, and for a time he ran on all fours like a dog. 

'Rience!' 

The magician swore and raised his hand. Both his hands and his head trembled as he 
chanted his spell. However, he was able to finish it. But not correctly. 

His twitching fingers shot out a thin jet of fire that ploughed through and the ice broke the 
surface. But it did not break across the line, as it should have in order to block the 
approaching girl's path. It broke along the line. It opened the ice with a loud crash and black 
water gushed forth. The gap rapidly widened and ran towards Dacre Silifant, who was 
watching amazed. 

'Lie down!' Screamed Skellen. 'Flee!' 

It was too late. The gap ran between Silifant's feet and expanded violently, breaking the 
ice up into large, glass-like pieces. Dacre lost his balance. The water drowned his cries. 
Boreas Mun fell into the hole and disappeared under the water. The kneeling Gemmererian 
and the body of Ola Harsheim also disappeared. Then Rience plopped into the black water, 
immediately followed by Skellen, who succeeded at the last minute to cling to the edge. The 


girl pushed off hard, jumped over the gap, landed with a splash in the thawing ice, and ran 
after the fleeing Brigden. A moment later a hair-raising shriek pierced Skellen's ears and 
echoed back from the edge of the forest. 

She had caught up with Brigden. 

'Sir...' groaned Boreas Mun, who had somehow managed to crawl onto the ice. 'Give me 
a hand... Lord Coroner...' 

Skellen ran to the edge and pulled him out, where he began to shake terribly. Then 
Silifant attempted crawl out, but broke the edge of the ice. He disappeared once more under 
water. But he was instantly up again, coughing and spitting. He pulled himself onto the ice 
with a superhuman effort. He crawled out and lay there, exhausted to the utmost. A puddle 
formed around him. 

Boreas groaned and closed his eyes. Skellen trembled. 

'Save me... Mun... Help...' 

Rience hung on the edge of ice, up to his armpits in the water. His wet hair lay close to 
skull. His teeth were chattering like castanets – it sounded like the haunting overture to a 
hellish Danse Macabre. 

Skates crunched. Boreas did not move. He waited. Skellen trembled. 

She was coming. Slowly. Blood flowed from her sword, leaving a drip line on the ice. 

Boreas swallowed. Although he was soaked to the skin with icy water, he suddenly 
became terribly hot. 

But the girl ignored him. She looked at Rience, who was trying in vain to get onto the ice. 

'Help me...' Rience said through his gnashing teeth. 'Save me...' 

The girl slowed down and turned around on the ice with dance-like grace. She stood there 
with her legs slightly apart, holding her sword with both hands, steadily, across her hips. 

'Save me...' stammered Rience, as he clawed his fingers into the ice. 'Rescue me... And 
I'll tell... where Yennefer is... I swear...' 

The girl slowly pulled the scarf from her face. And smiled. Boreas Mun saw the hideous 
scar and with difficulty repressed a scream. 

'Rience' said Ciri, still smiling. 'You wanted to teach me what pain is. Do you 
remember? With these hands. These fingers. With these? With which you are now holding 
onto the ice?' 

Rience replied, but Boreas did not understand it, because the magician's teeth were 
chattering so much that articulate speech was impossible. Ciri turned around on the ice and 
lifted her sword with one hand. Boreas gritted his teeth, convinced that she would deal a 


death blow to Rience, but the girl only got momentum going. To the vast astonishment of the 
tracking detector, she ran away quickly, accelerated with sharp foot movements. She 
disappeared in the fog, and for a moment the rhythmic crunch of ice skates fell silent. 

'Mun... Heeellp... meee... out...' Rience forced through his gnashing teeth, his chin on the 
edge of the ice. He threw both arms on the ice, trying to cling to it with his fingernails, but all 
of his nails had already broken off. He spread his fingers and tried, with palms and joints, to 
grasp the bloody ice. Boreas Mun looked at him and knew with a terrible certainty that... 

He heard the crunch of ice skates at the last moment. The girl approached with uncanny 
speed, almost a blur before his eyes. She skated close along the hole in the ice, slipped past 
the tight margin. 

Rience cried out. Then he choked on the thick, icy water. And then he disappeared. 

Next to the ice hole, in the beautifully smooth trail of ice skates, blood was visible. And 
fingers. Eight fingers. 

Boreas Mun vomited on the ice. 

 

*** 

 

Bonhart galloped on the edge of the slope along the shore at a great rate, without worrying 
about the horse that could break its legs at any minute in the snow-covered holes. The frozen 
pine branches struck him in the face and lashed over his arms, and ice dust poured down his 
collar. 

He could not see the lake, the whole valley was like a full of mist like a boiling cauldron. 

But Bonhart knew that the girl was there. 

He could feel it. 

 

*** 

 

Under the ice, far below, a curious swarm of striped perch swam alongside a sinking 
object. The fascinating, blinking, silver box that had slipped from the pocket of a dead body 
floating in the water above it. Before the box reached the bottom and kicked up a mud cloud, 
the boldest perch even tried to touch it with their snouts. Suddenly, they scattered in horror. 

The box was letting out strange, alarming vibrations. 


'Rience? Can you hear me? What is happening with you? Why have you not answered the 
last two days? I am asking for a report! What about the girl? You must not allow her to enter 
the tower! Are you listening? Do not let her enter the Tower of the Swallow... Rience! 
Answer me, damn it! Rience!' 

Rience, of course, was unable to respond. 

 

*** 

 

The slope stopped, the bank was flat. The end of the lake, Bonhart thought, I'm on the 
edge. I have cut off the little girl's way out. Where is she? And where is this cursed tower? 

The fog curtain suddenly ripped and blew away. And as he looked up he saw her. She was 
directly in front of him, sitting on her black mare. A sorceress, he thought, she has some 
connection with this animal. She sent it to the end of the lake to wait for her there. 

But that changes nothing. 

I have to kill her. To hell with Vilgefortz. I have to kill her. First I'll make sure she pleads 
for her life... And then I kill her. 

He cried, kicked his spurs into his horse, and went into a breakneck gallop. 

And suddenly he realized that he had lost. That she had misled him. 

Only a hundred and fifty paces separated them – but it was a hundred and fifty paces of 
thin ice. In addition, the curved surface of the lake was now to the other side – the girl, who 
was riding along the curve, was much closer to the end. 

Bonhart swore, tugged at the reins, and drove his horse onto the ice. 

 

*** 

 

'Run, Kelpie!' 

Under the hooves of the black mare splashed the frozen ground. 

Ciri pressed against the horse's neck. The sight of Bonhart's pursuit filled her with dread. 
She feared this man. Just the thought of entering battle with him made her feel as though an 
invisible fist pressed into her stomach. 

No, she could not fight him. Not yet. 


The tower. Only the tower could save her. And the portal. Just as it did on Thanedd when 
the magician Vilgefortz was close behind her, even reaching out for her... 

Her only salvation was the Tower of the Swallow. 

The fog lifted. 

Ciri pulled on the reins and suddenly felt a monstrous heat flood her. She could not 
believe what she saw. What was in front of her. 

 

*** 

 

Bonhart saw it too. And cried triumphantly. 

There was no tower at the end of the lake. There were not even the ruins of a tower, 
because there simply was nothing. Only a barely visible, hardly rising hillock. Crowned by a 
barren cairn dotted with icy plant stems. 

'There you have your tower,' he cried. 'There is your magic tower! There you have your 
rescue! A pile of stones!' 

The girl seemed to hear nothing and see nothing. 

She directed the mare towards the vicinity of the little hill to the cairn. She raised both 
hands toward heaven, as if to curse the heavens for what had happened to her. 

'I told you,' Bonhart yelled as he kicked his brown with his spurs, 'that you belong to me! 
That you will do what I want! That no one will stop me! Neither men nor gods, neither devils 
nor demons! Nor and enchanted tower! You belong to me, witcheress!' 

The hooves of the brown sounded on the ice. 

The fog suddenly bunched together under the blows of a swirling wind that rose out of 
nowhere. His brown began to neigh, prance, and chomp his teeth at the bit. Bonhart leaned 
down in the saddle and pulled at the reins with all his force, because the horse was raging – 
her head tossed back and forth, as she stomped and slid on the ice. 

Standing between him – on the shore between him and Ciri – a snow-white unicorn 
danced and reared up, shielding the girl. 

'Such tricks will not work on me,' cried the bounty hunter, while he got the horse under 
control. 'I am not scared by magic! I will catch you, Ciri! This time I will kill you, 
witcheress! You are mine!' 

Again the mist clenched together and took strange forms. The figures were becoming 
clearer. There were riders. The nightmarish silhouettes of ghost riders. 


Bonhart stared. 

On the skeletal horses rode the skeletons of horsemen dressed in rust-eaten armour and 
chain mail, scraps of coats, and battered and corroded helmets that were adorned with buffalo 
horns or with the remains of ostrich and peacock plumes. The ghosts' eyes shown with a 
bluish glow from under the visors of their helmets. A tattered banner rattled. At the head of 
the cavalcade galloped a man armed with a crown on his helmet and a gorget on the chest, 
which showed through his opened rusty cuirass. 

Away, it droned in Bonhart's head. Away, mortal. She does not belong to you. She belongs 
to us. Away! 

One could not deny that Bonhart had courage. The ghosts could not frighten him. He 
overcame the horror and did not fall into a panic. 

But his horse turned out to be less resolute. 

The brown stallion reared up, began to prance a ballet on its hind legs, neighed, and 
jumped wildly. The ice broke under the impact of horseshoes with a penetrating crack, and 
the ice floes stood upright as the water shot up. The horse screamed and clapped its hooves 
on the front edge of the ice, which broke. Bonhart pulled his feet from the stirrups jumped 
off. Too late. 

The water closed over his head. It began to hammer and to roar like a bell in his ears. His 
lungs were threatening to explode. 

He was lucky. His feet met with something that surely must have been the sinking horse. 
He pushed himself and appeared with a flourish, spluttering and gasping. He grabbed the 
edge of the ice. Without panicking, he drew his knife, cut it into the ice, and pulled himself 
out. He lay there, breathing heavily, as the water dripped down from him. 

The lake, the ice, the snow-covered slopes, the white-covered black spruce forest – all in 
one fell swoop was illuminated by an unnatural, deathly pale light. 

With enormous effort, Bonhart rose to his knees. 

Over the horizon blazed the deep blue sky in a dazzling corona of brightness. A dancing 
vortex of beams of light shot from the dome of light, from the sudden fiery columns and 
towering spirals. The fast-changing shapes of ribbons and draperies hovered in the sky, 
flashing, erratic. 

Bonhart began to croak. His throat seemed to be bound by an iron garrotte. 

At the spot that had been just been nothing but a hillock and a cairn of stones, a tower 
now rose. 

Majestic, willowy, smooth, shining, sculptured from a single block of basalt. In the few 
windows of the serrated peaks at the top the flickering fire of the aurora borealis flamed. 


He saw the girl turn in the saddle to look at him. He saw her bright eyes and the line of an 
ugly scar on her cheek. He saw the girl driving the black mare forward, as they entered 
without haste into the blackness beneath the stone arch of the entrance. 

And they disappeared. 

The aurora borealis exploded into blindingly light whirls of fire. 

When Bonhart could see once more, the tower was gone. There was only a snow-covered 
hillock, and a heap of stones dotted with icy plant stems. 

Kneeling on the ice, dripping, surrounded by a puddle of water, the bounty hunter roared 
wildly, horribly. From his knees, he stretched his hands toward heaven and he cried, 
screamed, cursed, and reviled – men, gods, devils, and demons. 

The echo of the cry rolled through the wooded slopes and ran across the frozen surface of 
Lake Tarn Mira. 

 

*** 

 

The interior of the tower immediately reminded her of Kaer Morhen – an equally long 
black corridor behind the doorway, an equally endless abyss in alignment with the columns 
and statues. She could not understand how this chasm fit in the slender obelisk of the tower. 
But she knew that trying to analyze it made no sense – not in the case of a tower that sprung 
up out of nowhere, that suddenly appeared where nothing had been before. In such a tower, 
anything was possible, and you couldn't be surprised by anything. 

She looked back. She did not believe that Bonhart had dared – or had been able – to 
follow her here. But she preferred to make sure of that. 

The archway through which she was riding shone with a bright, unnatural light. 

Kelpie's hooves clattered on the floor, which started to crack under the horseshoes. Bone. 
Skull, tibia, ribs, femur, pelvis. She rode through the middle of a giant ossuary. She was 
reminded again of Kaer Morhen. The dead should be buried in the ground... How long ago 
was that... At that time I actually believed such a thing... the majesty of death, respect for the 
dead... But death is just death. And a dead man is just a cold corpse. It does not matter where 
it lies, where his bones disintegrate. 

She rode into the darkness, under arches, between columns and statues. The darkness 
began weigh on her like smoke. Intrusive whispers and soft sighs urged incantations in her 
ears. Huge doors suddenly flared up in front of her and opened. They opened one by one. 
Doors. An infinite number of heavy doors opened silently in front of her. 

Kelpie's hooves rattled on the ground. 


The geometry of the surrounding walls, arches, and columns was suddenly disturbed, so 
violently that Ciri thought it must not be real. It seemed to her that she was travelling through 
the interior of some impossible polyhedral body, a sort of giant octahedron. 

The doors continued to open. But they no longer gave only a single direction. They 
opened up endless possibilities and directions. 

Ciri began to see. 

A black-haired woman who holds an ash-blonde girl by the hand. The girl is afraid, 
afraid of the dark, afraid of the her urgent whisper, horrified by the clatter of horseshoes she 
hears. The black-haired woman with the sparkling star of obsidian on her neck is afraid. But 
she cannot show it. She continues with the girl. It is her predestination. 

Kelpie's hooves. The next door. 

Iola the Second and Eurneid, in short coats, knapsacks on their backs, marching on a 
frozen, snow-covered road. The sky is deep blue. 

The next door. 

Iola First kneeling before the altar. Next to her is Mother Nenneke. They stare, their faces 
twisted in a grimace of horror. What do they see? Past or future? Truth or falsehood? 

Above them both, Nenneke Iola – are hands. The outstretched hands of a blessing of a 
woman with golden eyes. The necklace of the woman is a diamond that shines like the 
morning star. A cat is on the woman's shoulder. A falcon is above her head. 

The next door. 

Triss Merigold adjusts her beautiful chestnut-brown hair that is tousled by wind gusts. 
But there is no escaping that wind, no protection from it. 

Not here. Not on the top of the hill. 

On the hillside below a long, endless line of shadows. Figures. They go slowly. Some turn 
to face her. Familiar faces. Vesemir. Eskel. Lambert. Coen. Yarpen Zigrin and Paulie 
Dahlberg. Fabio Sachs... Jarre... Tissaia de Vries. 

Mistle... 

Geralt? 

The next door. 

Yennefer, in chains, shackled to the wall of a dripping wet dungeon. Her hands are one 
large mass of clotted blood. Her black hair is matted and dirty... Her lips are cracked and 
swollen... But in her violet eyes, the will to struggle and resist is still not extinguished. 

'Mother! Hang in there! Hold on! I'll come to the rescue!' 


The next door. Ciri turned her head away. With regret. And embarrassment. 

Geralt. And a green-eyed woman with black short-cut hair. Both naked. Joined, rising 
together. Contributing to each other's pleasure. 

Ciri gained control of her adrenaline compressed throat and promoted Kelpie. The hooves 
clattered. The darkness vibrates with whispers. 

The next door. 

Hail, Ciri. 

'Vysogota?' 

I knew that you would succeed, my efficient lady. My brave swallow. Have you taken any 
harm? 

'I defeated them. On the ice. I had a surprise for them. The skates of your daughter...' 

I was thinking about psychological harm... 

'I held back the revenge... Did not kill all that I desired to kill... I did not kill the Owl... 
Although he was the one who hurt and disfigured me. I controlled myself.' 

I knew you would win, Zireael. And that you would enter the tower. I'd read about it. 
Because that's been described... It's all already been described... Do you know earns one his 
degree? One's ability to use sources. 

'How can it be that we can talk to each other... Vysogota... Are you...?' 

Yes, Ciri. I am dead. Oh unimportant! More importantly, I learned what I sought... I know 
where those lost days went, what happened in the Korath Desert, how you disappeared from 
the eyes of your pursuers... 

'And how I came here, into this tower, yes?' 

The elder blood that flows through your veins gives you power over time. And over space. 
Over dimensions and spheres. You are now the Mistress of the Worlds, Ciri. You are a 
powerful force. Do not allow worthless criminals to take and abuse for their own purposes. 

'I will not allow it.' 

Farewell, Ciri. Farewell, Swallow. 

'Goodbye, old crow.' 

The next door. Brightness, dazzling brightness. And the pervasive scent of flowers. 

 

*** 


 

The mist covering the lake, light as down, was quickly blown away by the wind. The 
surface of the water was smooth as a mirror and white flowers shone on the green carpet of 
the shallow sea lilies. 

The banks drowned in greenery and flowers. 

It was warm. 

It was spring. 

Ciri was not surprised. How could she wonder at anything now? Because now, everything 
was possible. November, ice, snow, frozen ground, the pile of stones on the passing of bare 
stems hillock – there it was. But here, the willowy basalt tower with the serrated peaks 
reflected in the green, lily-strewn waters of the lake. This was May, because only in May did 
the wild rose and black cherry blossom. 

Nearby, someone was playing on a reed pipe or a flute, a fun, jumping little tune. 

Standing on the shore of the lake, with their front feet in the water, were two snow-white 
horses. Kelpie snorted and struck her hoof on the rocks. As the horses lifted their heads and 
the water dripped from their nostrils, and Ciri sighed loudly. 

Because they were not horses, but unicorns. 

Ciri was not surprised. She had sighed with admiration, not with astonishment. 

The melody could be heard more clearly now, it came from behind the cherry bushes 
clustered with white flower. Kelpie went in that direction by herself, without any invitation. 
Ciri swallowed then followed. Both unicorns, motionless as statues, stared at her. They 
reflected on the smooth water surface. 

Behind the cherry bushes, a light-haired elf with a triangular face and huge, almond-
shaped eyes sat on a round stone. He was playing, his fingers danced over the holes of the 
flute. Although he noticed Ciri and Kelpie, although he looked at them, he did not stop 
playing. 

The small, fragrant white flowers and the black cherries had an intense smell such as Ciri 
had never experienced in her life. No wonder, she thought soberly: In the world where I've 
lived, the cherries just smell different. 

In that world, everything is different. 

The elf finished the tune with a long high trill, put down the flute, and stood up. 

'What took you so long?' He asked, smiling. 'What kept you?' 

THE END OF THE FOURTH VOLUME 


