Chapter Four 

 

 

'The last and first name of the witness?' 

'Selborne, Kenna. Sorry, I mean Joanna' 

'Occupation?' 

'Miscellaneous services.' 

'Does the witness make fun? The witness should mind the fact that this is a treason trial, 
by an Imperial Court! The lives of many people will depend on the witness's testimony, 
because treason is punishable by death! The witness is reminded that she did not appear 
voluntarily before the court, but was presented by the Citadel, where she was being held in 
solitary confinement, and whether she is returned or is released into the world depends, 
among other things, on the testimony of the witness. The Court has permitted this long tirade 
to make the witness aware of just how completely inappropriate it is that such antics and 
jokes have even been brought into this room! They are not only tasteless, but may also have 
extremely serious consequences towards the witness. The witness has half a minute to think 
about it. Afterwards, the Tribunal will ask the question again.' 

'I'm ready, Your Honour.' 

'Please address us as 'High Tribunal.' The occupation of the witness?' 

'I'm a psionic, High Tribunal. But mainly in the employ of Imperial Intelligence Service, 
which means...' 

'Please give brief and concrete answers. If any additional explanations are needed, you 
will be asked for them. The court is aware of the fact that the witness cooperated with the 
Imperial Intelligence Services. However, I ask you to put on record what the name 'psionic' 
means, which the witness has used to describe her profession.' 

'I have pure PPS, that is to say I am a psychic of the first type, with no possibility of PK. 
Specifically, I do the following: speak and listen to the thoughts of others, which can be done 
from a distance with a wizard, an elf, or another psionic. And penetrate their minds to 
transmit an official order. That means forcing someone to do what I want. I am also 
clairvoyant, but only under a sleep state.' 

'Let the record show that the witness, Joanna Selborne, is a psionic, one with 
extrasensory abilities. She is capable of telepathy, tele-empathy, and precognition under 
hypnosis, but has no psychokinetic abilities. The witness is reminded that the use of magic 
and extrasensory abilities is strictly prohibited in this hall. We continue with the 


interrogation. When, where and under what circumstances was the witness exposed to the 
person that has been posing as Cirilla, the princess of Cintra?' 

'The fact is that I had never heard the name Cirilla until I was in the slammer... that is, in 
solitary confinement, High Tribunal. During the investigation, I was told that she was the 
same person who had always been mentioned in my presence as Falka or the Cintrierin. 
However, the circumstances were such that I need to describe the timeline, which will make 
things clear. They were this: I was approached in a tavern in Aetolia by Dacre Silifant, who is 
sitting there...' 

'Let the record show that the witness, Joanna Selborne, has voluntarily called the accused 
Silifant. Please continue.' 

'Dacre, High Tribunal, was in the process of recruiting a crew... That is, an armed 
division. Murderers and assassins, both men and women... Dufficey Kriel, Neratin Ceka, 
Chloe Stitz, Andres Vierny, Til Echrade... All no longer living... And those who have 
survived are mostly seated here, under guard...' 

'Please specify exactly when the witness's encounter with the defendant, Silifant, took 
place.' 

'It was last year, in the month of August, towards the end. I do not remember the exact 
date. In any event it was not in September, because that September, ha, left an impression on 
me! Dacre, who had heard of me somewhere, said that he needed a psionic for his crew, and 
one that was not afraid of magic, because they would have to deal with wizards. The work, he 
said, was for the Emperor and Empire, it paid well, and the commander of the crew would be 
none other than The Owl himself.' 

'By 'The Owl' the witness refers to Stefan Skellen, the Imperial Coroner?' 

'That is who I mean, sure.' 

'Let the record take note. When and where did the witness meet Coroner Skellen?' 

'That was in September, on the fourteenth, in the small fort Rocayne. If the High Tribunal 
will allow me, Fort Rocayne is a border station which protects the trade route from Maecht to 
Ebbing, Geso, and Metinna. That is where Dacre Silifant led our crew, fifteen horses. So 
overall we were twenty-two, because there were others were already posted in Rocayne, 
under the command of Ola Harsheim and Bert Brigden.' 

 

*** 

 

The wooden floor echoed with the sounds of heavy boots, clinking spurs, and clattering 
metal buckles. 'Greetings, Stefan!' 


Not only did The Owl remain sitting, he never even took his legs off the table. He waved 
his hand briefly, a very stately gesture. 'Finally,' he said sullenly. 'You've made me wait a 
long time for you, Silifant.' 

'Long?' Dacre Silifant laughed. 'That's a good one. You, Stefan, gave me four weeks 
time to find you about a dozen of the top guys in the Empire and its surroundings. I've 
brought you a crew that couldn't be matched even with a year of recruiting! Is that not praise 
worthy, eh?' 

'Let's wait with the praise,' said Skellen coldly, 'until I've inspected your crew.' 

'I'm immediately concerned: They're both mine and yours now, Mr. Skellen. Lieutenants, 
Neratin Ceka and Dufficey Kriel' 

'Greetings, greetings.' The Owl finally decided to stand up, and his aides did likewise. 
'Make yourselves known, gentlemen... Bert Brigden, Ola Harsheim.' 

'We know each other well.' Dacre Silifant said, as he and Ola Harsheim vigorously shook 
hands. 'We crushed the rebellion under the old Braibant in Nazair. That was great, eh, Ola? 
Ah, classic! The horses were up to their fetters in blood! And Mr. Brigden is, if I'm not 
mistaken, from Gemmera? Of the Gemmeran Pacifiers? Well, he has friends in the crew! I've 
got some Pacifiers.' 

'I'm very excited to have a look at them,' added The Owl. 'Shall we go?' 

'Just a moment,' said Dacre. 'Neratin, go and tell the crew that they need to make a great 
impression during for the Lord Coroner's inspection.' 

'Is that a him or a her, Neratin Ceka?' The Owl's eyes narrowed as he watched the officer 
leave. 'Is it a woman or a man?' 

'Mr. Skellen...' Dacre Silifant cleared his throat, but when he spoke, his voice was sure 
and his eyes were cold. 'That I do not know. Apparently it is a man, but I have not verified 
the claim. On the other hand, of Neratin Ceka's qualities as an officer, I have no doubts. 
What you asked would be important if I wanted to court him. But I do not want to court him. 
Or her either, I suppose.' 

'You're right,' admitted Skellen after a short deliberation. 'There's nothing more to say. 
Let's have a look at your crew, Silifant.' 

Neratin Ceka, the individual of undetermined gender, had lost no time. When Skellen and 
his officers stepped into the courtyard, the division had assumed a well organized line 
formation. Neither a horse's head nor single foot stuck out as a prominent feature. The Owl 
cleared his throat for silence. What a nasty mob, he thought. Oh, if policy did not prohibit... 
Together such a mob could go into the border countries and rob, murder, rape and sow 
conflict... enough to make one feel young again... Oh, if only policy allowed it! 

'Well, Mr. Skellen?' inquired Dacre Silifant, his flushed face with hidden enthusiasm. 


'How do you find them, my great Owl?' 

The Owl let his gaze roam from face to face, from silhouette to silhouette. Some he knew 
personally – for better or for worse. Others he knew because he had heard of them, of their 
reputations. 

Til Echrade, the bright-haired elf scout from the Gemmeran Pacifiers. Rispat La Pointe, a 
sergeant from the same company. And another gem: Cyprian Fripp the Younger. Skellen had 
been present at the execution of the elder. Both brothers were rumoured to have sadistic 
tendencies. 

Then, casually and crookedly sitting in the saddle of a piebald mare was Chloe Stitz, a 
professional thief, who was occasionally hired and used by the Secret Services. The Owl 
quickly looked away from her brazen gaze and mischievous smile. 

Andres Vierny, a Redanian Nordling and a butcher. Stigward, a pirate and a renegade 
from the Skellig Islands. Dede Vargas, a devil of an assassin. Cabernet Turent, a murderer of 
passion. 

And others. All similar. They are all alike, thought Skellen. A brotherhood whose 
members had all killed at least five people. All of them are akin to each other. The same 
movements, the same gestures, the same kind of talk, walk, and dress. 

The same eyes. Indifferent and cold, flat and motionless like snake eyes, whose 
expression would change for nothing, not even the most egregious atrocities. 

'Well? Mr. Stefan?' 

'Not bad. Not a bad crew, Silifant.' 

Dacre flushed again and saluted in the Gemmeran way, knocking his fist to his chest. 

'In particular,' Skellen reminded him, 'I requested a few who are familiar with magic. 
That fear neither magic nor sorcerers.' 

'I've taken it into consideration. Indeed, here is Til Echrade! And another beside him 
there, the classy Miss on the tall chestnut mare, next to Chloe Stitz.' 

'Bring the latter to me.' 

The Owl leaned on the railing, tapping it with the studded shaft of his whip. 'Greetings, 
folks!' 

'Greetings, Mr. Coroner!' 

'Many of you,' continued Skellen, as the echo of many greetings died down, 'have 
previously worked with me, for me or under my orders. For those who do not know me, let 
me explain what I expect from my people and what I do not tolerate from my people. Know 
that I am not speaking to just to hear the sound of my own voice.' 


'Even today some of you will get jobs to start tomorrow morning. In the territory of 
Ebbing. I remember that Ebbing is officially an autonomous kingdom, and that we have no 
right to take violent action there, so I order that you will proceed with caution and discretion. 
You stand in the Imperial Service, but I forbid you to imagine that is a reason for you to brag 
and to treat the local authorities arrogantly. I prohibit anyone to display such behaviour. Is 
that clear?' 

'Yes, commander, sir!' 

'Here in Rocayne we are guests, and I expect you to act like guests. I prohibit you to 
leave your assigned quarters without a compelling reason. I prohibit you to contact anyone 
outside of the fort. Well, the officers will think of something to keep you from cracking out 
of boredom. Mr. Harsheim, Mr. Brigden, please point to the division to their 
accommodations!' 

 

*** 

 

'I had hardly dismounted, High Tribunal, when Dacre grabbed my arm. 'Lord Skellen,' 
he says, 'wants to talk to you, Kenna.' So we went. The Owl was sitting with his feet up on a 
table, tapping his whip against his boot tops. And he bursts out with the same question – 
whether I am the Joanna Selborne who was involved in the disappearance of the ship Star of 
the South. Then I told him that I had nothing to prove. He started laughing. 'I like,' he says, 
'people who have nothing to prove.' Then he asked if I have an innate PPS talent. When I 
confirmed this, he turned serious and said, 'I thought to use your talents on the magicians, but 
first you'll have to deal with another person, a person who is no less mysterious.'' 

'Is the witness is sure that Coroner Skellen used those exact words?' 

'Yes. I'm psionic.' 

'Continue please.' 

'Then a messenger interrupted us. He was very dusty and you could see that he had not 
spared his horse. He had urgent news for The Owl, so Silifant Dacre takes me to the stables 
and tells me he has a feeling we will spend the evening in the saddle, due to the messenger. 
And right he was, High Tribunal. Before anyone could even think about dinner, half of the 
division was already on horseback. I was lucky – they took Til Echrade, the Elf. And I was 
glad too, because I was saddle sore for the next few days and my butt hurt me something 
horrible... And just then I started to menstruate...' 

'The witness will not include vivid depictions of their own intimate feelings. And stay on 
topic. When did the witness discover the identity of this 'mysterious person', mentioned by 
the Coroner Skellen?' 


'I will tell you, but I must tell it in the proper sequence, or else everything will become so 
complicated that you will not be able to understand it! Back then, those who had to hurry to 
the horses before dinner were hunters. They rode from Rocayne to Malhoun, and they 
returned from there with some adolescent...' 

 

*** 

 

Nycklar was furious with himself, so much so that he really would have loved to just get 
up and leave. 

If only he had remembered the warnings that reasonable people had given him! Or even if 
he would have remembered the proverbs, specifically the tale of the raven, who could not 
keep his beak shut! If only he had just done what was he had to do and returned home to 
Jealousy! But no! Excited by pride, adventure, riding a horse, and a purse decorated with 
coins, Nycklar had not been able to resist the chance to shine. Instead of returning directly 
from Claremont to Jealousy, he had ridden to Malhoun, where he had many friends, many of 
whom were young ladies he was courting. In Malhoun he puffed himself up like a gander in 
the spring, clamoured, blustered, and galloped across the green He bought the bar rounds in 
the tavern and threw money around with a straight face, as he was a prince of the blood, or at 
least a count. 

And he talked. 

He told them what had happened four days earlier in Jealousy. He told it all, then changed 
to the long-nose version, exaggerated, fabled, and finally downright lied – which did not 
disturb the audience at all. The regulars of the pub, locals, and newcomers listened all too 
readily. And Nycklar was well informed. And he put more and more his own person in the 
centre of his inventions. 

On the third evening his own tongue brought him trouble. 

Dead silence fell at the sight of the people who entered the tavern. The silence was 
broken only by the sounds of the clink of spurs, the clatter of metal buckles, and the 
crunching of boots. The sounds were like the ominous bells that ring down from a tower 
before tragedy strikes a village. 

Nycklar did not even get a chance to play the hero. He was packed so quickly out of the 
tavern that it was argued he had probably only touched the floor with his heels three times. 
His acquaintances, who the day before, when they were drinking at his expense, had declared 
friendship unto death, now silently lowered their heads almost under the table top, as if under 
the tables naked women danced or some other wonder demanded their attention. Even the 
deputy representative of the sheriff, who was present in the tavern, turned to the wall and said 
not a peep. 


Nycklar also said not a peep, not asking who, what, where or why. The horror had 
transformed his tongue into a stiff, dry peg. 

They put him on his horse and bade him ride. For several hours. Then there was a fort 
with stockade and tower. A yard full of arrogant, noisy, well armed soldiers. And a study. 
Three people in the room. A leader and two subordinates, which was immediately obvious. 
The leader, who was somewhat short, dark, and richly dressed, spoke with astonishing 
politeness. Nycklar's mouth dropped when he heard the leader apologize for the trouble and 
inconvenience, and ensure him that no harm would be done. But he was not fooled. These 
people reminded him very much of Bonhart. 

The impression proved to be surprisingly accurate. For these people were looking for 
Bonhart specifically. Nycklar, as might have been expected, since it was indeed his own 
tongue that had got him into this predicament, immediately began to talk when prompted. 

He was warned to tell the truth and to not embellish anything. He was warned politely, 
but sternly and emphatically. The richly dressed man was the one who gave him these 
warnings; he constantly played with a metal-tipped whip and his eyes were disgusting and 
evil. 

Nycklar, the son of the coffin-maker from the village of Jealousy, told the truth – the 
whole truth and nothing but the truth. He told of the morning of the ninth of September in 
Jealousy, when the bounty hunter Bonhart had exterminated the whole gang of Rats, sparing 
only one bandit's life – the youngest of them, who was called Falka. He told how the people 
of Jealousy had gathered to see how Bonhart would finish and execute the prisoner, but 
crowd was deceived, because miraculously, Bonhart did not execute Falka – he didn't even 
torture her! He did nothing to her, not even as much as an ordinary guy does to his wife on 
Saturday night when he comes home from the pub – that is to say, a few kicks, a couple to the 
face – and nothing more. 

The richly dressed gentleman ceased playing with the whip as Nycklar told of how 
Bonhart later sectioned off the heads of the slain Rats before Falka's eyes, and how he tore 
off the heads' gold earrings like he was picking raisins from a cake. How Falka, tied to the 
hitching posts, had tossed back and forth vomiting at this sight. 

He told how Bonhart had then garnished Falka with a collar, like the collar of a bitch, and 
tugged her into The Chimera's Head. And then... 

 

*** 

 

'And then,' said the lad, as he licked his lips over and over again, 'the noble gentleman 
Bonhart ordered beer, because he had gotten into terrible sweat and his throat was parched. 
Then he suddenly cried that he would like to give someone a good horse and a full five 


florens in cash. That's how he said it, with those exact words. I immediately reported so no 
one could volunteer for the opportunity before me, and because I was very keen on a horse 
and a bit of money. My father drank away all of the money he earned with the coffins. So I 
reported to him and asked which horse I could take, certainly one of the Rats'? The noble 
gentleman Bonhart looked at me, a look that made a chill run down my spine, and I said 
could take a kick in the ass, but that I would have to earn the other things. What could I do? 
A horse at my fingertips, quite literally, for the horses of the Rats were tethered to the post. 
Specifically, I wanted Falka's black mare – a uniquely beautiful animal. So I bowed and 
asked what I should do to earn them. And Lord Bonhart replied that I should ride to 
Claremont, stopping in Fano on the way. On whichever horse I wanted. Though he must have 
known I had my eye on the black mare, because he prohibited me from taking it. So I took 
the mare with the blaze on her...' 

'Less colours of horses,' Stefan Skellen admonished him dryly. 'More concrete facts. 
What did Bonhart give to you?' 

'The noble gentleman Bonhart wrote letters and told me to take very good care of them. I 
was to hand deliver them over to people in Fano and Claremont.' 

'Letters? What did they say?' 

'How would I know that, sir? I couldn't read them because they were sealed. Sealed by 
the ring of the Lord Bonhart.' 

'But do you remember who the letters were addressed to?' 

'Yes indeed, I do. Lord Bonhart made me repeat it ten times so I wouldn't forget. I rode 
with no detours, and hand delivered the letters to the correct people personally. Both told me 
that I'm a bright lad, and this noble businessman Lord even gave me a penny...' 

'To whom did you hand over the letters? Stop your incoherent rambling!' 

'The first letter was sent to Master Esterhazy, a swordsmith and ironsmith in Fano. And 
the second to the noble Lord Houvenaghel, a merchant in Claremont.' 

'Did they perhaps open the letters in your presence? Maybe someone said something after 
reading? Think hard, boy.' 

'I don't know. I didn't pay attention at the time, and I can't remember anything now...' 

'Ola, Mun.' Skellen nodded to his adjutants, without raising his voice in the least. 'Pull 
down the lad's pants. I plan to leave about thirty whip marks.' 

'I remember,' cried the lad. 'It just came back to me!' 

'There is nothing better to recall memories' – The Owl showed his teeth – 'than nuts 
with honey or a whip on the ass. Start talking.' 

'In Claremont, the businessman Lord Houvenaghel read the letter out loud because there 


was another gentleman there – a little, pure halfling. To whom the Lord Houvenaghel said... 
uh... He said that at any moment there would be a rush to the bank, such as the world has not 
yet seen. That's what he said!' 

'That's all you can remember?' 

'By my mother's grave, I swear it! Please don't beat me, sir! Have mercy!' 

'Well, well, get up. Don't lick my boots! Here, have a penny.' 

'Thanks a million... Sir...' 

'I said, do not lick my boots. Ola, Mun, what do you make of it? What does a bank...' 

'Panic,' Boreas Mun said suddenly. 'Not a rush, but panic.' 

'Yes,' cried the lad. 'That's what he said! It's as if you were there, sir!' 

'Panic and rush!' Ola Harsheim pounded his fist into his palm. 'A decent cipher, but not 
overly imaginative. The word 'rush', or 'panic', is a warning against trackers or a raid. 
Bonhart has warned them that they should prepare for it! But from whom? Who is ahead of 
us?' 

'Who knows,' The Owl said thoughtfully. 'Who knows. We will have to send people to 
Claremont... And also to Fano. You're in charge of it, Ola. Have the groups split the duties... 
So listen, boy...' 

'Yes, sir!' 

'While you were setting off to deliver Bonhart's letters, he, I suppose, remained in 
Jealousy? But he was preparing to leave? Was he in a hurry? Did he perhaps say where he 
was going?' 

'He did not. But he wouldn't have been ready to leave right away. He had commanded 
that his outer clothing, which was terribly stained with blood, was to be washed and cleaned, 
so he ran around in just his shirt, trousers, and sword belt. Nevertheless, I think he was in a 
hurry. He had killed the Rats and cut off their heads for a reward, and he had to ride off in 
order to turn them in. And in order to turn in this Falka he had captured alive for someone. 
That's his job, right?' 

'This Falka... Did you get a good look at her? What are you smirking at, you fool?' 

'Oh, sir! Did I get a good look at her? You bet! With all the details!' 

 

*** 

 


'Take off your clothes,' repeated Bonhart. There was something in his voice that made 
Ciri flinch instinctively. But immediately rebellion won. 

'No!' 

She never even saw the movement of his fist, which caught her in the eye. Her eyes 
flashed and the earth began to shake, giving way under her feet and slamming into her 
suddenly painful hip. Her cheeks and ears burned like fire – she realized that she had not been 
hit with a fist, but with the flat back of a hand. 

He stood over her, holding his clenched fist to her face. She saw a heavy signet ring in the 
form of a skull, which had just stung her face like a hornet. 

'Since you didn't lose a front tooth this time,' he said with icy voice. 'The next time that I 
hear the word 'No' from you, I will knock out both of them. Take off your clothes.' 

She rose unsteadily and began to unlace laces and open buttons with shaky hands. The 
nearby population of Jealousy's The Chimera's Head inn began to murmur, clear their 
throats, and stare. The inn's landlady, a widow of the blaze, bent down behind the counter 
and pretended to be looking for something. 

'Take everything off. Even the last shreds.' 

I am not here, thought Ciri while she undressed and stared dully at the floor. No one is 
here. I'm not even here. 

'Stand legs apart.' 

I'm not here. What is happening right now is nothing to me at all. Nothing at all. I feel 
nothing. 

Bonhart laughed. 'I have the impression that you flatter yourself too much. I must dispel 
these fantasies. I'm having you disrobe, you idiot, so that I can be sure that you have not 
hidden any magical seals, talismans or amulets somewhere on your body. Not for me to enjoy 
the pathetic sight of your nudity. I can't imagine who would. You're a scrawny adolescent, as 
flat as a pancake and as ugly as sin. Even if I were keen on those attributes, I think I'd rather 
fuck a turkey.' 

He stepped closer and separated her clothes with his toe, looking appraisingly. 'I said all 
of it! Rings, earrings, necklace, bangles!' 

She hastily took off her jewellery. With a kick he pushed her blue fox collared jacket, her 
colourful scarves, her belts made of silver chains, and her gloves into a corner. 

'You aren't going to doll yourself up like a parrot or a half-elf from a brothel! You can 
wear the rest of the clothes. And what you all gaping at? Someone bring me some food, 
because I am hungry! And you, fat man, look after my stuff at the laundry!' 

'I'm the Alderman here!' 


'That is good' Bonhart said emphatically. Under his gaze the Alderman of Jealousy 
seemed to become thinner. 'If the washing has damaged any of my stuff, I'll officially hold 
you accountable. March off to the laundry! The rest of you, get out of here! And you, boy, 
why are you still waiting around here? You have the letters and the horse is saddled, so get 
onto the road and gallop! And remember: If you do not keep your word, if you lose the letters 
lose or confuse the addresses – I will find you and arrange you so that even your own mother 
will not recognize you!' 

'On my way, sir! Incoming!' 

 

*** 

 

'That day' – Ciri pursed her lips -'he hit me twice with his fist and belt. Then he lost 
interest. He just sat there and stared at me silently. His eyes were... something fish-like.' 

'No eyebrows, no eyelashes... Such aqueous globules, each sunk in a black core. He 
stared at me with those eyes and remained silent. It scared me more than the hitting. I had no 
idea what he planned.' 

Vysogota remained silent. Mice ran through the cabin. 

'He constantly asked me who I was, but I said nothing. Like the time when I had been 
captured in the Pan of the Korath Desert, I fled deep into myself, if you know what I mean. It 
was as if I was a doll, a wooden puppet, and I was numb and dead to everything that 
happened to this doll. I looked down as if from above. What did it matter if he hit me, 
trampled on me, garnished me with a collar like a dog? That was not me. I was not there at 
all... Do you understand?' 

'I understand.' Vysogota nodded. 'I understand, Ciri.' 

 

*** 

 

'This time, High Tribunal, it was our turn. Our group. Neratin Ceka received our 
command and Boreas Mun was assigned our tracker. Boreas Mun, High Tribunal, could find 
the trail of a fish in water, it was said. What a tracker he was! It was said that he once...' 

'The witness should refrain from such digressions.' 

'What? Ah, yes... I see. So, we saddled the horses and rode to Fano. This was the morning 
of the sixteenth day of September...' 

 


*** 

 

Neratin Ceka and Boreas Mun rode in front, behind them – side by side – were Cabernet 
Turent and Cyprian Fripp, following them were Kenna Selborne and Chloe Stitz , and in the 
rear rode Andres Vierny and Dede Vargas. The latter two sang a newly fashionable soldier's 
song, which had been funded and distributed by the War Ministry. Even the animals that 
lived in the barren wasteland the company travelled through were stung by the song's terribly 
bitter rhymes and disarming disregard for the basics of grammar. It was titled 'Yes, at the 
Front', and all of the verses – there were over forty – started with those very words. 

 

Yes, it happens at the front, 

That time whoever lost his head, 

Or on the morrow it turns out 

Depends on the giblets you let out 

 

Kenna whistled softly. She was satisfied that she had been able to stay with the good 
people she had met on the long journey from Aetolia had to Rocayne. After speaking with 
The Owl, she had rather expected to be assigned to random squad, such as the group 
consisting of people from Brigden and Harsheim. Til Echrade had been assigned to such a 
group, but the elf knew most of his new comrades, and they knew him. 

Although Dacre Silifant had ordered them to ride with all speed, they rode at a walk. 
They were professionals. They galloped and spurted for as long as you could see them from 
the fort, then they slowed down. Crazy riding and galloping was fine for brats and amateurs, 
but haste, it is well known, is only appropriate if you've caught fleas! 

Chloe Stitz, the professional thief from Ymlac, told Kenna of her previous collaboration 
with Coroner Stefan Skellen. Cabernet Turent and Fripp the Younger curbed their horses, 
frequently turning around and listening. 

'I know him well. I have already served under him a couple of times...' 

Chloe stumbled a little as the double meaning of her own statement occurred to her, but 
she immediately forced an unconcerned smile. 'Under his command, I served very well,' she 
blurted out. 'No, Kenna, do not worry. It is not mandatory with The Owl. He did not force me 
– I myself sought and found the opportunity. But to be clear I will tell you that protection is 
not obtained in this way, not with him.' 

'I've never done anything like that' Kenna pursed her lips and looked defiantly into the 
grinning faces of Turent and Fripp. 'I'm not looking for an opportunity or for protection. I am 


not so easily intimidated. Especially not by a cock!' 

'Let's not turn this into a cock fight, ladies,' noted Boreas Mun, who had reined in his dun 
stallion, waiting for Chloe and Kenna. 'Let us talk of something else,' he continued, and rode 
along beside them. 'Bonhart has no equal with the sword. I would be happy if it turned out 
there was no dispute or hostility between him and Mr. Skellen – if everything were to be 
resolved well.' 

'I'm not looking forward to fastening my sword belt,' confessed Andres Vierny from 
behind. 'I thought we'd be tracking the magician, since they've given us the psionic, this here 
Kenna Selborne. And now we're after Bonhart and some girl!' 

'Bonhart, the bounty hunter' – Boreas Mun cleared his throat -'had a contract with Mr. 
Skellen. And he has broken it. Although he had promised Mr. Skellen that he would kill the 
girl, he left her alive.' 

'Certainly because someone else gave him more money for her alive than The Owl did 
for her dead,' Chloe Stitz said, shrugging. 'That's bounty hunters for you. No trace of 
honour!' 

'Bonhart was different,' contradicted Fripp the Younger , his face turned backward. 'It 
used to be his trademark that he had never broken his word.' 

'All the more strange that he suddenly starts now.' 

'But why?' inquired Kenna, 'Why is this girl is so important? Why should she have been 
killed, and why was she not?' 

'What do we care?' Boreas Mun grimaced. 'We have orders! And Mr. Skellen has the 
right to what is rightfully his. Bonhart should have made Falka cold, but he has not done so. 
Mr. Skellen demands accountability.' 

'This Bonhart' repeated Chloe Stitz, full of conviction, 'must be getting even more for her 
alive than for her dead. That's the whole secret.' 

'That was the Lord Coroner's first thought as well,' said Boreas Mun, 'Bonhart was hired 
by one of the Barons of Geso, who was terribly angry at the band of Rats and promised a 
reward to whoever captured Falka alive – so he could slowly torture her to death. But it has 
been shown that it is not so. We do not know who Bonhart is saving this Falka for, but he is 
certainly not saving her for that Baron.' 

 

*** 

 

'Mr. Bonhart!' The thick Alderman of Jealousy came storming into the inn, panting and 
gasping for air. 'Mr. Bonhart, there are armed men in the village! They came riding in on 


horses!' 

'Well, something like that,' Bonhart wiped his plate with bread. 'would be miracle if 
they, say, came riding in on monkey-men. How many?' 

'Four.' 

'And where are my clothes?' 

'Only just washed... not yet dry...' 

'You can all go to the devil. Because I'm going to have to welcome the guests my 
underpants. Of course, such as the guests, such as the greeting.' 

He moved his belt over his underwear, strapped on his sword, tucked the ends of his pants 
legs into his boot tops, then tightened Ciri's collar and pulled on the chain. 'On your feet, 
little rat.' 

By the time he brought her out on the porch, the four horsemen had already approached 
the inn. You could tell that they had travelled a long way through the wild – bedrolls, dishes, 
and horses were stained with dried mud and dust. 

There were four of them, but they also led a packhorse. When Ciri saw this packhorse she 
suddenly became very hot, although the day was very cold. It was her white mare, still 
wearing her bridle and saddle. And her headband, a gift from Mistle. The mounted horsemen 
were the same that had killed Hotsporn. 

They stopped in front of the inn. One, certainly the leader, came on, riding closer and 
greeting Bonhart with his marten fur cap. His skin was well tanned and he wore a black 
moustache that looked like someone had applied a line on his upper lip with charcoal. Ciri 
notice that he shrugged his upper lip again and again – a tick that made him look constantly 
angry. Perhaps he was. 

'Howdy, Mr. Bonhart!' 

'Howdy, Mr. Imbra. Hello to you, gentlemen.' Without haste, Bonhart fixed Ciri's chain 
to a hook on the porch. 'Forgive me for the inexplicable outfit in front of you, but I was not 
expecting you. You have come a long way... Did you drift up here to Ebbing from Geso? And 
how is the highly esteemed Baron? Is he in good health?' 

'He is flourishing with life,' the tanned man replied indifferently, and then shrugged his 
upper lip. 'But we have no time to waste with small talk. We're in a hurry.' 

Bonhart pulled his belt and underpants. 'Don't let me delay you.' 

'We heard that you've done in the Rats.' 

'That is true.' 

'And according to the promise that you gave the Baron' – the tanned man continued his 


lip shrugging when he saw Ciri on the porch – 'You have not killed Falka.' 

'Also, I believe, true.' 

'So you had all the luck, and we had none.' The man glanced at the white mare. 'Oh well. 
We'll take the girl and ride home. Rupert, Stavro, take her.' 

'Easy, Imbra.' Bonhart raised his hand. 'You will not be taking anyone. For the simple 
reason that I will not be giving you anyone. I've changed my mind. I'm keeping the girl for 
my own use.' 

The tanned man, who Bonhart called Imbra, leaned over in his saddle, coughed, and spat 
impressively far, almost to the stairs to the porch. 'You promised the Baron!' 

'I did. But I've changed my mind.' 

'What? Did I hear that right?' 

'I do not care, Imbra, what you heard.' 

'For three days you were entertained in the castle. Because of the promise that you gave 
the Baron, you drank and ate for three days. The best wines from the cellar, roasted peacocks, 
venison, pies, pike in cream. For three nights you slept like a king in a bed of the best down. 
And now you've changed your mind? Yes?' 

Bonhart remained silent, wearing an indifferent and bored expression. 

Imbra gritted his teeth to suppress the twitch of his lip. 'You realize, Bonhart, that we 
could take the Rat from you by force?' 

Bonhart's face, until then bored and amused, immediately became focused. 'Try it. You 
are four, I am one. Moreover, I am in my underwear. But for you bastards I don't need to 
wear pants.' 

Imbra spat again, pulled on his reins, and turned his horse. 'Ugh, Bonhart what's wrong 
with you? You were said to be a solid, true professional who infallibly kept his word. But 
now it turns out that your word is worth less than shit! And since you can judge a man 
according to his word, it follows that you yourself are worth...' 

'Be careful,' Bonhart interrupted the speech in a cold voice, resting his hand on his belt 
buckle, 'that you do not let anything too coarse slip out. Because it will hurt when I return it 
to you, stuffing it down your throat...' 

'You are courageous against four! But do you also have sufficient courage for fourteen? 
For I can assure you that Baron Casadei will not let this pass!' 

'I'd tell you I would come visit your Baron – if it were not for the people around him, 
among them women and children. So instead I tell you that I will remain for about ten days in 
Claremont. Any who want to take Falka away or take revenge on me are welcome to come to 


Claremont.' 

'I'll be there!' 

'I'll be waiting. Now get out of here.' 

 

*** 

 

'They were afraid of him. Monstrously afraid. I could feel the fear that they exuded.' 

Kelpie whinnied loudly and tossed her head back and forth. 

'There were four of them, armed to the teeth. And he was alone, in his underwear and a 
frayed short sleeve shirt. It would have been laughable if... if he had not been so terrible.' 

Vysogota silently closed his eyes, which were watering from the wind. They stood on a 
hill that towered above the marshes of Pereplut, near the spot where the old man had found 
Ciri two weeks ago. The wind bent the reeds and made the water ripple on the flood plains of 
the river. 

'One of the four,' continued Ciri, while they allowed the mare to go to the water and 
drink, 'had a small crossbow on his saddle, and his hand crept towards it a bit. I could almost 
hear his thoughts and feel his dismay. 'Can I manage to stretch the tendon? To shoot? And 
what if I am too slow?' Bonhart also noticed this crossbow and the hand creeping toward it, 
and even guessed the rider's thought like I did, I am sure. And I am sure that rider would not 
have been able to stretch the crossbow.' 

Kelpie lifted her head and began to neigh, her teeth clinking on the bit. 

'I knew better. I, who had fallen into his hands. Though, I still did not understand his 
motives. Their conversation had reminded me of what Hotsporn had said earlier. This Baron 
Casadei wanted me brought to him alive, and Bonhart had promised to do so for him. But 
now Bonhart was ready to fight him for me. Why? Did he want to deliver me to someone 
who paid more? Had he somehow found out my secret, who I was in truth? And was he about 
to hand me over to the Nilfgaardians?' 

'We rode out from the settlement that evening. He allowed me to ride Kelpie. But my 
hands were handcuffed in front of me and he held me all the time with the collar and leash. 
All the time. We rode, almost without stopping, all night and all day. I thought I was dying of 
exhaustion. But somehow he was not tired at all. He was not a man. He was the devil 
incarnate.' 

'Where did he take you?' 

'To a place called Fano.' 


 

*** 

 

'When we arrived in Fano, High Tribunal, it was already dark, a darkness where your 
eyes couldn't even see your head. It was actually only the sixteenth of September, but with a 
night like that – cursed, cloudy, and cold – one could think it was November. We didn't need 
to look long to find the workshop of swordsmith, not only because it was the largest estate in 
the whole town, but also because it constantly produced the sound of hammering of steel. 
Neratin Ceka... Mr. Writer does not need to write down this name, because I don't know if I 
had already said, but Neratin is no longer alive, he was killed in a village called One-Horn...' 

'Please do not instruct the minute-taker. Please continue in the statement.' 

'Neratin knocked on the gate. We were asked politely, who we were and what we wanted. 
We asked politely for a hearing. They let us in. The workshop of the swordsmith was a 
beautiful building, as well as a virtual fortress – a palisade of pine beams, oak turrets, interior 
walls made of brushed larch-wood...' 

'The court is not interested in architectural details. The witness may come to the point. 
But first I ask you to repeat the name of the sword smith for the record.' 

'Esterhazy, High Tribunal. Esterhazy of Fano.' 

 

*** 

 

The swordsmith Esterhazy looked at Boreas Mun for a long time and did not hurry to 
answer to the question he had been asked. 

'Maybe Bonhart was here,' he finally said, playing with a bone whistle that hung at his 
neck. 'Or maybe he was not? Who knows? Ladies and gentlemen, this is a workshop that 
manufactures swords. For any matters relating to the swords, we will gladly give a fast, 
flowing and exhaustively thorough answer. But I see no reason to answer questions related to 
our guests and customers.' 

Kenna pulled a handkerchief from her sleeve and acted as if she was brushing her nose. 

'A reason can be found,' said Neratin Ceka. 'You can find it, Mr. Esterhazy. Or I can. 
Would you like to choose?' Contrary to Neratin's effeminate impression, his face could be 
hard and his voice threatening. 

But the swordsmith just snorted as he played with his whistle. 'Choose between bribery 
and threats? I would not like to. Both the one and the other are only worthy of spitting on.' 


Boreas Mun cleared his throat. 'Just a little information. Is that so much? We've known 
each other for some time, Mr. Esterhazy, and the name of Coroner Skellen is not strange...' 

'It is not,' interrupted the blacksmith. 'Not at all. The investigations and actions with 
which the name is associated are also not strange to me. But here we are in Ebbing, a 
kingdom with its own government and autonomy. Even if only in appearance. Therefore, I 
will tell you nothing. Go on your way. As consolation, I promise that if someone should ask 
about you in a week or a month, they will learn nothing from me either.' 

'But, Mr. Esterhazy...' 

'Do you want it more clearly? Here you go – Get out of here!' 

Chloe Stitz hissed angrily, Fripp's and Vargas' hands crawled toward their sword 
handles, and Andres Vierny's hand rested on the war hammer hanging at his hip. Neratin 
Ceka did not move, not even his face twitched. Kenna saw him turn an eye to the bone 
whistle. Before they had entered, Boreas Mun had warned them – the sound of the whistle 
was a signal to call hidden security guards on warhorses, who were employed by the factory 
as 'quality inspectors'. 

But Neratin and Boreas had anticipated and planned for all of this. They still had a trump 
card in reserve. 

Kenna Selborne. The psionic. 

Kenna had already probed the blacksmith, had carefully felt his pulses, and had 
cautiously advanced into the thicket of his thoughts. Now she was ready. With the cloth over 
her nose – there was always the danger of bleeding – she urged the pulsating, imperious will 
of his mind. Esterhazy began to choke and turned red. He grabbed the top of the table he was 
sitting at with both hands, as if he feared the table would fly away to warmer regions – along 
with a bundle of bills, an inkwell, and a paperweight in the shape of a sea nymph holding two 
tritons. 

Quietly ordered Kenna, nothing, nothing is happening. You just want to tell us what 
interests us. You know, what interests us, and you already want to push the words out of you. 
So go ahead. Go on. You'll see that once you begin to talk, there will no longer sounds in 
your head, pounding at your temples and in your ears until you can no longer stand it. And 
the convulsion in the cheek will go away. 

'Bonhart' said Esterhazy with croaking voice, lacking the usual syllable articulation, 'was 
here four days ago, on the twelfth of September. He had brought a girl with him, which he 
called Falka. I had expected their visit, because two days earlier I had received a letter from 
him...' 

A thin line of blood started to run from his left nostril. 

Speak, ordered Kenna. Speak. Tell me everything. You'll see that it is easier for you. 


 

*** 

 

The swordsmith Esterhazy looked curiously at Ciri, without getting up from behind the 
oak table. 'For her,' he guessed, as he tapped the barrel of his pen to his paper weight, which 
was a strange figure. 'The sword that you asked for in your letter is for her. Is that correct, 
Bonhart? Well then, let's assess... check to see if this matches with what you wrote. Size is 
five foot nine inches... Right. Hundred and twelve ounces of weight... Well, we could give 
her less than one hundred and twelve, but that's beside the point. A handle, have you written, 
to fit a size-five glove... Let's see those hands, young lady... Well, you were right there.' 

'I always am,' said Bonhart dryly. 'Do you have any decent iron for them?' 

'In my business,' Esterhazy replied proudly, 'we do not offer anything that is made with 
iron that is not decent. I understand that you require a sword for a fight, not for a stroll. Oh 
yes, you've already written that. No question, a weapon for this young lady can be easily 
found. This weight and size of thirty inches fits a standard sword. For the light body and the 
little hand she needs a mini hybrid with a nine inch extended handle and ball knob. We could 
also offer her an Elven-Taldaga, or a Zerrikanian Sabre, or a Viroledaner...' 

'Show us the goods, Esterhazy.' 

'Do we have ants in our pants? Well, then we want... We want... hold on, Bonhart? What 
the hell? Why are you leading her on a leash?' 

'Keep your nose to yourself, Esterhazy. Don't stick it where it does not belong, or else 
you might lose it!' 

Esterhazy played with the whistle hanging around his neck and looked at the bounty 
hunter without fear or respect, even though he had to look up sharply. 

Bonhart twirled his moustache and cleared his throat. 'I,' he said more quietly, but still 
angrily, 'Do not interfere in your affairs and interests. Does it surprise you that I expect the 
same thing from you?' 

'Bonhart,' – the swordsmith did not quiver or whimper -'if you leave my house and my 
yard, if you close my door behind you, then I will respect your privacy, the confidentiality of 
your interests, and the specificity of your profession. And I'm not going to be poking my nose 
into them, you can be sure. However, in my house, I do not permit human dignity to be 
violated. Do you understand me? Beyond my door, you can drag this little girl behind horses 
if it suits you. But in my house you will take off that collar. Now.' 

Bonhart grabbed the collar and loosened it, but he did not fail to first jerk it so violently 
that Ciri nearly fell to her knees. 


Esterhazy acted as if he had not seen and let go of the whistle. 'That's better,' he said. 
'Let's go.' 

They went through a small gallery into another, slightly smaller courtyard, adjoining the 
rear of the forge on one side and an orchard on the other. Under a roof supported by carved 
posts was a table where servants waited, ready to design swords. Esterhazy gestured for 
Bonhart and Ciri to approach the table. 

'Please, this is what I have to offer.' 

So they went. 

'Here' – Esterhazy pointed at the long series of swords on the table -'we have my 
production, mainly all forged here. You can see the horseshoe, my blacksmith's mark. Prices 
range from five to nine florens, because the swords are standard. Over here, on the other 
hand, we have swords I have only assembled or trimmed. For the most part, they are imports. 
Which you can see by the blacksmith marks. Those hallmarked with crossed hammers are 
from Mahakam, those with the head with a crown or a horse from Poviss, and those with a 
sun from the famous inscription firms of Viroleda. Prices start at ten florens.' 

'And at the end?' 

'It depends. Take for example this beautiful Viroledaner. ' Esterhazy took the sword from 
the table, saluted it, and then went into a fencing position where he moved the hand and 
forearm in a complicated trick called Moving the Angel. 'It cost fifteen. An old work and the 
pommel is a collector's item. One can see that it was made to order. The motif engraved on 
the vessel indicates that it was intended for a woman.' He turned the sword, holding it in his 
hand so that the flat of the blade was visible to them. 'The traditional inscription describes 
how to handle a Viroledaner: 'Not without reason drawn from the sheath, not without 
honour.' Ha! In Viroleda such regulations are still engraved. But all over the country, such 
blades are drawn by crooks and fools.' 

'And as the country's honour has fallen down, so has the price, because these days hardly 
anyone wants these goods...' 

'Do not talk so much, Esterhazy. Give her the sword, she should try it in her hand. Take 
the weapon, girl.' 

Ciri took the light sword and immediately felt the sure grip in her palm. The weight of the 
blade melted and invited her arm to cock and to strike. 

'It's a mini-bastard,' she unnecessarily explained to Esterhazy. She could deal with the 
longer handle and three fingers on the ball knob. 

Bonhart took two steps back into the yard. He drew his sword from its scabbard and made 
a dashing cut through the air. 'Come on!' he said to Ciri. 'Kill me. You have a sword. You 
have an opportunity. You have a chance. Use it, for you will not get a second any time soon.' 


'Have you gone mad?' 

'Shut your mouth, Esterhazy.' 

She deceived him with a sidelong glance, misled him with a shrug of the shoulder, and 
then struck like a bolt of lightning from a flat Sinister. The blade struck his parry, which was 
so strong that Ciri faltered and had to jump back, bumping her hip against the table with the 
swords. As she tried to keep her balance, she instinctively lowered her sword – they both 
knew that at this moment, if he had wanted to, he could easily have killed her. 

'Have you all gone mad?' Esterhazy raised his voice; the whistle was back in the hands of 
the gnomish looking man. Servants and workmen looked on stunned. 

'Put away the iron.' Bonhart said, not looking away from Ciri. He did not pay any 
attention to the swordsmith at all. 'Put it away, I said. Otherwise, I will cut off your hands!' 

After a moment of brief hesitation, she complied. 

Bonhart smiled eerily. 'I know who you are, snake. But I'll make you to admit it yourself. 
With words or with deeds! I will force you to confess who you are. And then I'll kill you.' 

Esterhazy hissed as if someone wounded him. 

'And that sword' – Bonhart glanced at the piece -'is too heavy for you. So, you were too 
slow. You were as slow as a pregnant snail. Esterhazy! What you've given her was at least 
four ounces too heavy.' 

The swordsmith was pale. His gaze wandered between her and Bonhart, back and forth, 
and he had a strange look on his face. Finally, he nodded to a servant and made arrangements 
in a low voice. 

'I have something,' he said slowly, 'that should satisfy you, Bonhart.' 

'So why did you not show it to me before?' growled the bounty hunter. 'I wrote that I 
wanted something exquisite. Did you think, perhaps, that I could not afford a better sword?' 

'I know what you can afford,' Esterhazy said emphatically. 'I learned it only a moment 
ago. And why I did not show it to you before? I could not know who you would bring me... 
leashed and collared. I could not imagine for whom the sword was for or for what purpose it 
was intended. Now I know everything.' 

The servant came back, carrying an elongated display case. 

'Come here, girl,' Esterhazy said quietly. 'Look.' 

Ciri approached. She looked. And sighed loudly. 

 

*** 


 

She drew the sword with a rapid movement. The light of the fireplace shone red and 
sparkled brilliantly on the wavy edge of the blade. 

'This is it,' said Ciri. 'What do you think? Of course you can take it in your hand if you 
want. But beware, it is sharper than a razor. Do you feel how the handle sticks to the palm? 
It's made from the skin of a flat fish, which has a poisonous sting in its tail.' 

'A ray.' 

'Maybe. This fish has very small teeth on its skin, so the handle does not slip out of your 
hand, even when you sweat. Look at what is etched on the blade.' 

Vysogota leaned forward and looked down with his eyes screwed together in 
concentration. 

'An Elven Mandala,' he said after a while and looked up. 'A so-called Blathan Caerme, a 
sign of destiny: the stylized flowers of oak, spiraea and goat clover. The lightning struck 
tower is a symbol in the elder races of chaos and destruction... And on the tower...' 

'A swallow,' concluded Ciri. 'Zireael. My name.' 

 

*** 

 

'Indeed, not bad,' said Bonhart eventually. 'A Gnomish weapon – that can be seen 
immediately. Only the gnomes have forged such dark iron. Only the gnomes have sharpened 
flame-shaped blades, and only the gnomes have broken through the welds to reduce the 
weight... Admit it, Esterhazy. Is this an imitation?' 

'No,' said the blacksmith. 'An original. A real Gnomish-Gwyhyr. The knob is about two 
hundred years old. This version is, of course, much younger, but I would not call it an 
imitation. The gnomes of Tir Tochair made it on my order. According to the ancient 
techniques, methods, and patterns.' 

'Damn it. I actually might not be able to afford this sword. How much do you want for 
it?' 

Esterhazy was silent for a while. His expression was inscrutable. 'I ask nothing, Bonhart,' 
he finally said flatly. 'It is a gift. In order to fulfil what must be fulfilled.' 

'Thanks,' replied Bonhart, visibly surprised. 'Thank you, Esterhazy. A royal gift, truly 
regal... I guess so, yes. And I am in your debt.' 

'You are not. The sword is for her, not for you. Come here, girl with the collar. Look at 
the characters etched into the blade. You do not understand them, that's obvious. But I'll tell 


you. Look. The fate of pre-drawn line is crooked, but it leads to the tower here. To ruin, to the 
destruction of the existing values of the existing order. And here on the tower, you see? One 
swallow. The symbol of hope. Take this sword. May it fulfil what must be fulfilled.' 

Ciri gently stretched out her hand and gently stroked the dark blade with edges like a 
shiny mirror. 

'Take it,' Esterhazy said slowly, looking at Ciri with wide-open eyes. 'Take it. Take it in 
your hand, girl. Take...' 

'No,' Bonhart suddenly yelled. He jumped up, grabbed Ciri's shoulder, and pushed her 
aside with a vengeance. 'Away!' 

Ciri fell to her knees and the gravel in the yard stuck painfully into her palms. 

Bonhart slammed the box. 'Not yet,' he growled. 'Not today! You are not yet ready.' 

'Obviously,' Esterhazy agreed with him and looked into his eyes. 'Yes, it is obvious she 
is not yet ready. Too bad.' 

 

*** 

 

'There wasn't much useful information in the mind of the swordsmith, High Tribunal. We 
were there on the sixteenth of September, three days before full moon. But on our way back 
from Fano to Rocayne, we met up with a mounted Ola Harsheim, leading seven men – all 
that remained of the division. Because the day before, on the fifteenth of September, there 
had been a massacre in Claremont... of this I probably do not have to talk, since the High 
Tribunal surely knows about the massacre in Claremont...' 

'Please testify without worrying about what the Tribunal knows.' 

'Bonhart had anticipated us by a day. On the fifteenth of September he had brought Falka 
to Claremont...' 

 

*** 

 

'Claremont' repeated Vysogota. 'I know that town. Where did he take you?' 

'To a large house on the market square. With columns and arches at the entrance. You 
could see right away that a rich man lived there...' 

 


*** 

 

The room's walls were covered with rich tapestries and extremely ornate wall hangings, 
representing and depicting scenes from religion, hunting and rural life that involved women. 
The furniture shone with inlaid brass fittings, and the carpets were such that the foot sank to 
the ankle when one walked through them. But Ciri did not have time to notice these details 
because Bonhart walked through the room quickly, pulling her chain. 

'Hail, Houvenaghel.' 

Rainbow-coloured light fell through a glass window and shone against a tapestry of 
hunting scenes. In front of the tapestry stood a massive, imposing man, dressed in a gold-
embroidered jacket and a long, fur tunic. Although in the prime of his manhood, he was bald 
and his cheeks hung down like a bulldog's. 

'Hail, Leo,' he said. 'And you, Miss...' 

'The young lady,' Bonhart pointed to the chain and collar. 'does not have to be greeted.' 

'Politeness costs nothing.' 

'Save your time.' Bonhart pulled the chain, approached the man, and slapped the fat on 
his abdomen without further ado. 'You have gained a great deal of weight,' he said. 'Really, 
Houvenaghel, it would be easier to jump over you than to go around you if you stood in the 
way.' 

'The good life.' Houvenaghel said jovially and shook his cheeks. 'Hail, Leo, welcome. 
You are a welcome guest, because I have ample reason to celebrate today. Business is going 
so amazingly well that you almost want to knock on wood – the cashier rings on and on! 
Only today, to give you an example fresh in my mind, I had a Nilfgaardian Captain of the 
Reserve, a quartermaster, sell me an equipment shipment from the front – six thousand 
warrior bows. I can charge ten times what I paid him by selling the bows to hunters, 
poachers, thieves, elves, and other freedom fighters. I also bought a castle at an inexpensive 
price from a local Marquis...' 

'What the hell are you doing with a castle?' 

'I must live representatively. Again, business is going well. There is one thing I actually 
owe to you. A seemingly hopeless debtor has paid. Literally a moment ago. His hands were 
shaking as he paid. The fellow had seen you and thought...' 

'I know what he thought. Did you receive my letter?' 

'Yes.' Houvenaghel sat down heavily, hitting his stomach against the table so that the 
decanters and goblets clinked. 'And I've prepared everything. Have you not seen the odds? 
She has certainly fulfilled the promise of drawing a crowd... People are already at the arena. 


The cash register is ringing... Sit down, Leo. We have time. Let us talk, have some wine...' 

'I do not want your wine. Which has certainly been stolen from one of the Nilfgaardian 
transports.' 

'You must be kidding. This is an Est Est Toussaint, and the grapes were prepared when 
our gracious Emperor Emhyr was a little kid, shitting in his little duvet diaper. A good year 
for wines... To your health, Leo.' 

Bonhart silently saluted with his cup. 

Houvenaghel began to cluck as he looked out over Ciri critically. 'So this is the wide-
eyed fawn,' he said finally, 'that the letter promised would guarantee entertainment? I've 
heard that Windsor Imbra is in town. And also that he has a few cutthroats with him...' 

'Have my goods ever disappointed you, Houvenaghel?' 

'No, that's right. But I also have had nothing from you for a long time.' 

'I work less often than I used to. I am looking for an opportunity to retire completely.' 

'This requires capital to accomplish. I might know of a possibility... Want to hear it?' 

'In the absence of other distractions.' Bonhart shifted and swung his leg up on a chair, 
forcing Ciri to sit down. 

'Have you ever thought about leaving for the north? Up to Cintra, or on the North Case of 
the Yaruga? Did you know that anyone who drags themselves up there and settles in the 
conquered areas is guaranteed an allocation of four hides of land by the Empire? And ten 
years tax exemption?' 

'I,' the bounty hunter replied calmly, 'do not want to own a farm. I could not dig in the 
earth or breed cattle. I'm too sensitive. At the sight of an earthworm or shit, I throw up.' 

'Just like me.' Houvenaghel wobbled his jaw. 'On the whole, I still only tolerate illicit 
agriculture. The rest is repulsive. They say agriculture is the backbone of the economy and 
guarantees prosperity. I consider it to be unworthy and degrading to imply that my wealth is 
reliant on something that smells like dung. I have taken efforts in this respect. There is no 
obligation to till the land or keep cattle. It's enough to have it. If you develop it accordingly, 
you can collect a decent lease. You can believe me, it really is enough to live off. Yes, I have 
taken some efforts in this respect, so my question regarding a trip to the north still stands. 
Because you see, Bonhart, I have a job for you there. A permanent, well-paying job, which 
will be easy for you. And it is right up your alley: no shit, no worms.' 

'I'm willing to listen. Without obligations, of course.' 

'With a bit of entrepreneurial spirit and a low initial capital investment, one can put 
together some pretty decent large-scale plantations from the land-lots the Emperor gives to 
the settlers.' 


'I understand.' The bounty hunter bit his moustache. 'I understand where you're going. I 
know what efforts you undertake in respect to your prosperity. You reckon there will be no 
difficulties?' 

'Yes, but with two exceptions. First, we need to find people to hire to masquerade as 
settlers in the north and receive the land-lots. Pro forma for themselves, de facto, for me. But, 
since I am dealing with that, only the other difficulty concerns you.' 

'I'm all ears.' 

'Some of the settlers will take the land-lots and have no desire to part with them. They 
will forget about the contract they have with me and the money that they have received from 
me. You would not believe how deeply dishonesty, heartlessness, and rotten behaviour are 
anchored in human nature.' 

'I believe it.' 

'They must be convinced that dishonesty is not worthwhile. That they will be punished. 
That is where you come in.' 

'Sounds good.' 

'It is what it sounds like. I've already made a practice rotation. After the formal inclusion 
of Ebbing into the Empire, the land-lots were distributed. And later, when the law on 
collection in the city came into force. Such is Claremont, this pretty little town, on my land, 
so it belongs to me. This whole area belongs to me. Up there with blue-gray haze shrouded 
the horizon. That's all mine. Whole hundred and fifty hides. Imperial hides, no farm-
allotments. That's nearly ten thousand yoke. Or eighteen thousand nine hundred general 
units.' 

'Oh lawless realm, the near demise,' recited Bonhart ironically. 'Fall the Empire must, 
steal it all. In self-interest and selfishness is its weakness.' 

'Therein lies its power and strength.' Houvenaghel wobbled. 'You, Bonhart, confuse theft 
with individual entrepreneurial spirit.' 

'All too often,' the bounty hunter admitted calmly. 

'So what of our partnership?' 

'Aren't we dividing up the land in the north a bit too early? Shouldn't we play it safe and 
wait until Nilfgaard has won this war?' 

'Play it safe? Do not make jokes. The outcome of the war is predetermined. Wars are won 
with money. The Empire has what the North does not.' 

'Since we're talking about money...' 

'It's done.' Houvenaghel rummaged in the documents on the table. 'Here is a bank bill for 


one hundred florens. Here, the contract for the transfer of receivables from the Varnhagens of 
Geso to myself, based on the reward for the heads of the bandits. Please sign here. Thank 
you. A percentage of the revenues of the idea are for you, but invoices have not been 
completed, the cash register is still ringing. There is great interest in her, Leo. Very great. The 
people in my town suffer horribly from boredom and gloom.' He paused and glanced at Ciri. 
'I sincerely hope that you are not mistaken in regards to this person. That she provides decent 
entertainment... That she cooperates in the common interest of the profits...' 

'For her' – Bonhart looked at Ciri indifferently -'there is no profit here. You know that.' 

Houvenaghel frowned and looked indignant. 'It is bad, hell, for her to know that! You 
should not have told her! What's wrong with you, Leo? And if she does not want to be 
entertaining, if she proves to be unreliable and malicious? What then?' 

Bonhart did not change his facial expression. 'Then,' he said, 'we leave her in the arena 
and let your bulldogs at her. They were, as I recall, always reliable and entertaining.' 

 

*** 

 

Ciri was silent for a long time, rubbing her disfigured cheek. 

'I began to understand,' she said finally. 'I began to be understood what they wanted to 
do with me. I tensed myself, determined to flee at the first opportunity... regardless of the 
risk. But they gave me no chance. They guarded me well.' Vysogota remained silent. 

'They dragged me downstairs. Guests of this thick Houvenaghel were waiting there. 
Again nothing but eccentrics! Where in the world do so many strange oddities come from, 
Vysogota?' 

'You multiply. Natural selection.' 

 

*** 

 

The first of the men was so short and stocky. He looked more like a halfling than a human 
being, and he was even dressed like a halfling – humble, nice, neat and in pastel shades. The 
other man, though elderly, had the clothing and stature of a soldier. He wore a sword, and on 
the shoulders of his black jacket flashed a silver brooch, depicting a dragon with bat wings. 
The woman was light-haired and thin, had a slightly hooked nose and thin lips. Her pistachio-
coloured dress had a very low neckline. This was not a particularly good idea. There was not 
much cleavage to show, aside from wrinkled and dried skin, like parchment, which was 
covered with a thick layer of rouge and Blanche. 


'The highborn Marquise de-Nementh Uyvar', presented Houvenaghel. 'Mr. Declan aep 
Maelchlad Ros, Captain of the Reserve of his Imperial Majesty, the Emperor of Nilfgaard. 
Mr. Pennycuick, Mayor of Claremont. And this is Mr. Leo Bonhart, my cousin and longtime 
comrade-in-arms.' 

Bonhart bowed stiffly. 

'So this is the little bandit who should entertain us today,' said the Marquise with her thin 
and pale blue eyes fixed on Ciri. Her voice sounded hoarse, horribly hung-over, and 
appalling. It vibrated lasciviously. 'Not very nice, I'd say. But not badly built... I assume it's a 
very nice... body.' 

Ciri jerked around and pushed away the Marquise's outstretched hand, full of rage and 
hissing like a snake. 

'Please do not touch,' Bonhart said coldly. 'Do not feed. Do not irritate. I assume no 
responsibility if you do not obey my warnings.' 

'The body' – the Marquise licked her lips, ignoring him -'can always be tied to the bed, 
then it is more accessible. Would you drain me of my fun, Mr. Bonhart? My Marquis and I 
love these kinds of bodies, but the Lord Houvenaghel reproaches us if we take the local 
shepherdesses and peasant children. The Marquis has no way to hunt for little children any 
more. He cannot run fast, because of the chancres and condylomata that flare up in him when 
he runs...' 

'Enough, enough, Mathilda,' Houvenaghel said gently, but quickly, when he saw the 
disgusted expression on Bonhart's face. 'We must go to the arena. The Lord Mayor has just 
been reported that Windsor Imbra has arrived in the city with a detachment of servants of the 
Baron Casadei. So it's time for us to go.' 

Bonhart pulled a small bottle from his pocket, wiped his sleeve across the onyx plate of a 
little table, and poured a tiny mound of white powder on it. He pulled the chain attached to 
Ciri's collar. 

'You know how to use it?' 

Ciri clenched her teeth. 

'Take it through your nose. Or spit and wet your finger then rub it into your gums.' 

'No!' 

Bonhart did not even turn his head. 'Either you will do it,' he said softly, 'or I will do it, 
but in a way that all attendees have their fun. You do not only have mucous membranes in the 
mouth and nose, little rat. Also a few other weird places. I'll call servants, have them hold 
you, and make use of the weird places.' 

The Marquise de-Nementh Uyvar gave throaty laugh and looked on as Ciri reached for 


the narcotic with trembling hands. 

'Weird places,' she said, licking her lips. 'An interesting idea. I'll have to try that 
sometime! H-hey, girl, be careful, do not spill good Fisstech! Leave me a little bit!' 

 

*** 

 

The narcotic was much stronger than the one she had tried with the Rats. A few moments 
after taking it Ciri was hit by a blinding euphoria, figures were given sharper contours, light 
and colours stabbed her eyes, smells tempted her nose, noises were unbearably loud, and 
everything was surreal, fleeting as if figments of a dream. There were the stairs, there were 
smelly, dusty tapestries and wall hangings, there was the raucous laughter of the Marquise 
de-Nementh Uyvar. There was the courtyard, there were the fast rain drops on her face, the 
jerking on the collar, which she still wore. A huge building with a wooden tower and a large, 
repulsive, garish painting on the front. The painting depicted a dog that was biting a monster 
– a dragon, a griffin, or perhaps a wyvern. Many people waited outside the entrance to the 
building. One of them shouted and gesticulated. 

'This is disgusting! Disgusting and sinful, Mr. Houvenaghel! A former temple used for 
such godless, inhumane and abhorrent proceedings! Animals also feel Mr. Houvenaghel! 
They also have their dignity! It is a crime to pit them against one another for profit and the 
delight of the mob!' 

'Calm yourself, saintly man! And do not interfere with a private enterprise! And anyway, 
there will be no animals set on each other today. Not a single animal! Only human beings!' 

'Well then, accept my apologies.' 

The interior of the building was full of people sitting on benches, which formed an 
amphitheatre. In the centre there was a pit dug in the ground, a circular depression about 
thirty feet in diameter, supported by rough beams and walls surrounded by a balustrade. The 
stench and the noise were overwhelming. Ciri again felt a tug on the collar, then someone 
grabbed her under the armpits, and then someone gave her a shove. Suddenly she found 
herself at the bottom of the pit, falling down on sand. 

In the arena. 

The abrupt initial reaction was over, now the narcotic only lifted her mood and sharpened 
her senses. Ciri held her ears – on the benches of the amphitheatre the clamouring, teeming 
crowd went wild and whistled. The noise was unbearable. She noticed strong leather armour 
stretched around her right wrist and forearm, offering some protection. She could not recall 
when that had been put on her. 

She heard the familiar hung-over voice, saw the thin pistachio green Marquise, the 


Nilfgaard Captain, the pastel-hued mayor, Houvenaghel, and Bonhart taking a towering box 
above the arena. She uncovered her ears just as someone suddenly struck a metal gong. 

'Look, people! Today, in the arena, we have no wolf, no goblin, no endrega! Today, in 
the arena, we have the murderess Falka from gang of Rats! Taking bets at the box office near 
the entrance! Be generous with the pennies, folks!' 

'It's the best diversion you cannot eat or drink – whoever saves money here does nothing 
but lose out!' 

The crowd roared and clapped. The narcotic worked. Ciri trembled with euphoria and her 
senses registered everything, every detail. She heard the roaring laughter of Houvenaghel, the 
hung-over giggling of the Marquise, Bonhart's cold bass voice, the cry of the priest who had 
defended the animals, the shrieking of women, and the crying of children. She saw the dark 
blood stains on the beams that surrounded the arena, and the gaping, barred, stinking hole 
outside of it. She saw the sweat-shiny, brutally distorted visages over the balustrade. 

Sudden movement, raised voices, curses. Weapons hailed and pushed through the crowd, 
but stopped as they met with a wall of partisan armed guards. She had seen one of these 
people before, she remembered the tanned face and the line of a black moustache that looked 
like it had been applied with charcoal on a nervous twitching upper lip. 

'Mr. Windsor Imbra?' said the voice of Houvenaghel. 'From Geso? The Seneschal of the 
high-born Baron Casadei? Welcome, welcome our foreign guests. Take your seats at once, 
the spectacle will begin soon. But please do not forget to pay at the door!' 

'I'm not here for pleasure, Mr. Houvenaghel! I'm here on official business! Bonhart 
knows of what I speak!' 

'Really? Leo? Do you know what the Lord Seneschal is talking about?' 

'No jokes! I have fifteen men with me! We want Falka! Give her to us, otherwise there'll 
be trouble!' 

'I do not understand why you are so upset Imbra.' Houvenaghel frowned. 'But I would 
like to point out to you that this is not Geso and not the country of your Lord Baron. If you 
cry or make trouble, then I'll have you chased off with bull whips.' 

'No offense, Mr. Houvenaghel!' Windsor Imbra relented. 'But the law is on our side! 
Bonhart has promised Falka to the Baron Casadei. He has given his word. Let him see what 
comes of commitment and obligation!' 

'Leo?' Houvenaghel wobbled his cheeks. 'Do you know what he's talking about?' 

'I know and agree with him.' Bonhart stood up and waved his hand dismissively. 'I'm not 
going to oppose or raise objections. The girl is there, where you can all see her. Whoever 
wants her can take her.' 


Windsor Imbra looked stunned. His lips twitched violently. 'How?' 

'The girl,' repeated Bonhart and winked at Houvenaghel, 'is there for anyone who wants 
to take her out of the arena. Dead or alive, at your leisure.' 

'How?' 

'Damn, I gradually lose my patience!' Bonhart yelled in fake anger. 'How, like, nothing 
like! You damned organ grinder! How? However you want! If it fits you, then throw her out 
poisoned meat as you would a wolf. But I do not know if she will eat it. She does not look 
stupid, right? No, Imbra. Whoever wants to get her must take the trouble themselves. There, 
in the arena. You want Falka? Take her!' 

'You think to dangle this Falka under my nose like a frog on a hook with a catfish,' 
growled Imbra Windsor. 'I do not trust you, Bonhart. I smell it. There is in an iron hook in 
the bait!' 

'You can congratulate the good weather for the iron hook.' Bonhart said, as he stood and 
pulled the sword from Fano from under his bench. He drew it from its scabbard and threw it 
into the arena, so cleverly that the blade drilled vertically into the sand, two steps away from 
Ciri. 'Because without it the iron hook wouldn't be here. Clearly visible, not hidden. For I put 
no value on this woman, whoever wants to take her can take her. If he can.' 

The Marquise de-Nementh Uyvar laughed nervously. 'If he can,' she repeated with her 
contralto hung-over voice. 'Because now, that pretty little body has a sword. Bravo, Mr. 
Bonhart. I disliked the idea of these hoodlums accosting and devouring her defenceless 
body.' 

'Mr. Houvenaghel.' Imbra Windsor stood with his hands on his hips, without even 
appreciating the thin aristocrat admiring him. 'This show takes place under your auspices, for 
the arena belongs to you. Tell me what rules should we play by here, your own or those of 
Bonhart?' 

'The rules of the arena's laughter and cheers,' Houvenaghel replied as his stomach and 
bulldog jaw waggled. 'For while it is true that the arena belongs to me, our king is the 
customer who pays, who provides the financial support! The customer makes the rules. And 
we, the merchants have to abide by these rules: What the customer wants, he must get.' 

'The customer? That is, these people?' Windsor Imbra pointed with a sweeping gesture to 
the full bench seats. 'All these people have come and have paid to see a spectacle?' 

'Business is business,' said Houvenaghel. 'If there is demand for something, why not sell 
it? People pay for a wolf fight? And for fighting between an endrega and an aardvark? For 
dogs hunting rabbits in a field? Why are you surprised Imbra? The people want games and 
spectacles as much as their daily bread – from what I can tell, perhaps even more. Many of 
those who have come here today have saved some from their mouths. But look how their 
eyes shine. They can't wait to see how the show starts.' 


'But for all of that,' added Bonhart with venomous smile, 'at least a semblance of 
sportiness must be maintained. And now the girl has a blade. What do you think, good 
people? Am I right?' 

The good people confirmed confusedly, but just as loudly and joyously as Bonhart had 
anticipated. 

'The Baron Casadei,' said Windsor Imbra slowly, 'will not like this Mr. Houvenaghel. I 
tell you, it will not please him. I do not know if it's worthwhile for us to start with her armed.' 

'Business is business,' repeated Houvenaghel and waggled his jaws. 'Baron Casadei 
knows this well – he has borrowed a lot of money from me at low interest rates, and when he 
comes to borrow more, then we will settle our dispute somehow. But no foreign Baron will 
interfere in my private and individual corporate activities. Bets have already been placed and 
people have already paid admission. Blood must seep into this sand, here in the arena.' 

'Must?' roared Windsor Imbra. 'Like shit it must! I'd very much like to show you that 
nothing must seep in your arena! I could just turn around and ride away, not even looking 
back at you. Then you can seep your own blood here! The thought that I would be working 
for the amusement of this rabble sickens me!' 

'Let him go.' someone suddenly said from the crowd, an overgrown guy in a leather 
jacket made of horse hides. 'Let him go if he is sick. I will not mind. Because it was said that 
whoever gets the Rat, gets the reward. I will go into the arena.' 

'No! Out of the question,' cried one of Imbra's people, a not particularly large, but sinewy 
and powerfully built man. His hair was thick, tangled and matted into dreadlocks. 'We were 
here first! Isn't that right, boys?' 

'We sure were!' agreed a second of Imbra's men, who was thin and wore a goatee. 'We 
have the first turn! And you should not be so sensitive about your reputation, Windsor! The 
rabble looks on, so what? Falka is in the arena and we need only to reach out and take her. So 
what if the mob makes goggle eyes, we do not care!' 

'And what else can we do!' screamed a third, who wore a doublet of lively amaranth. 'It 
should be sporting, really, shouldn't it, Mr. Houvenaghel? This is the right place for a 
spectacle then! And there was talk of a reward!' 

Houvenaghel smiled broadly and nodded affirmatively, proudly and majestically, all the 
while his cheeks wobbled. 

'And what,' asked Goatee, 'are the odds?' 

'For now,' the businessman said, smiling, 'they are still not set on the outcome of the 
struggle! For now it is three-to-one that not one of you will venture into the arena.' 

'Phuuu!' roared Horsehide. 'I'll wager it! I'm ready!' 


'Piss off' Dreadlocks shouted back. 'We were here first and have the first turn. C'mon, 
what are we waiting for?' 

'As many as we can fit in the arena?' Amaranth adjusted his belt. 'Or separate?' 

'Oh, you sons of bitches!' shouted the pastel-hued Mayor – quite unexpectedly and with a 
voice like an ox, which did not suit his stature. 'Perhaps you would like to go ten against one? 
Perhaps you would like to be mounted? Perhaps a chariot? Perhaps you should check out the 
armoury and ask if you can borrow a catapult, so you can throw rocks on the girl from a 
distance? Well?' 

'Okay, okay,' interrupted Bonhart who had been consulting with Houvenaghel quickly. 
'It should be sporting, but it should also be fun. You can compete for two. As a pair, that is to 
say.' 

'But the reward,' Houvenaghel warned, 'will not be doubled! If you're a pair, you have to 
share.' 

'Why as a pair? Why two?' Dreadlocks tossed his hair from his shoulders with a violent 
movement. 'Are you not ashamed, guys? That's just a girl! Ugh! Stand back. I'll go in there 
myself. What should I do to her?' 

'I want Falka alive!' protested Windsor Imbra. 'To hell with your struggles and duels! I 
do not care about Bonhart's spectacle, I want that girl! Alive! You go in a pair, you and 
Stavro. And get her out of there.' 

'For me,' repeated Stavro, who was the man with the goatee, 'it is an affront to go against 
such a skinny thing as a pair.' 

'The Baron will sweeten this affront with a floren. But only if you take her alive!' 

'So, the Baron a miser.' Houvenaghel laughed out loud, his belly and bulldog jaw 
trembling. 'He does not have the sporting spirit and does not offer a worthwhile reward! I, 
however, support the sport. And therefore I increase the reward. Anyone who goes into the 
arena alone and leaves on their own feet again – I will pay with this hand here, from this bag 
here, not twenty, but thirty florens.' 

'What are we waiting for?' screamed Stavro. 'I go first!' 

'Hold on,' cried the little Mayor again in a voice of thunder. 'The girl has only a thin 
cloth on her back! So you also pull off your leather armour, soldier. It's sporty!' 

'Get yourselves the plague!' Stavro threw off his iron studded jacket and pulled his shirt 
over his head and shoulders. He was bare-chested, stick thin, and hairy. 'Get yourselves the 
plague, gentlemen, along with your shitty sports! So I'll go with bare skin! Oh! Should I take 
off my pants, too?' 

'Pull the trousers off!' croaked the Marquise de-Nementh Uyvar lasciviously. 'Then we 


will see if you're a man with more than your mouth!' 

Rewarded with thunderous applause, the naked-to-the-waist Stavro approached the arena 
and threw one leg over the bars of the barrier, carefully keeping Ciri in view. Ciri crossed her 
hands over her chest. She did not even step out to the sword spitted in the sand. Stavro 
hesitated. 

'Do not do it,' Ciri said very quietly. 'Do not make me... You will not touch me.' 

'No offense, kid.' Stavro jumped over the barrier. 'I have nothing against you. But 
business is business...' 

He did not finish because Ciri was already with him, she already held Swallow – so she 
called the gnomish Gwyhyr in her mind. She used a simple, almost certain to fail ruse called 
'Three Little Steps' – but Stavro fell fell for it. He took a step backwards and instinctively 
raised his sword, and already he was at her mercy – he stood with his back against the bars 
surrounding the arena and looked at the tip of Swallow, which was an inch from his nose. 

'That trick,' explained Bonhart to the Marquise, over the shouts and cheers of screaming, 
'is called 'Three Little Steps, Feint, and Failure'. A cheap number, I had expected something 
more sophisticated from the girl. But you must admit – if she wanted, the guy would not even 
be alive.' 

'Kill him! Kill him!' shouted the crowd, while showing the mayor and Houvenaghel their 
hands with thumbs pointed down. The blood drained from Stavros' face, making ugly 
pimples and pockmarks stand out on his cheeks. 

'I told you not force me,' hissed Ciri. 'I do not want to kill you! But you will not touch 
me. Go back where you came from.' 

She stepped back, turned around, lowered her sword and looked up at the stands. 'You 
play with me?' She exclaimed in a broken voice. 'You want to force me to fight? To kill? 
You're not forcing me. I will not fight!' 

'Did you hear Imbra?' Bonhart's mocking voice resounded in the silence. 'Pure profit! 
And no risk! She will not fight. You can go in, take her out of the arena alive, and take her to 
Baron Casadei so he is happy with you. You can take her without risk! With your bare 
hands!' 

Windsor Imbra spat. Stavro, his back pressed to the bars still in the chamber, breathed 
hard and frantically gripped the sword in his hand. 

Bonhart smiled. 'But, Imbra, I'll bet diamonds to nuts, that you will not prosper.' 

Stavro exhaled heavily. It seemed that the girl who stood with her back to him was 
distracted, unfocused. He roared with rage, shame and hatred. He could not stand it. He 
attacked. Quickly and treacherously. 


The audience did not see how she dodged and struck back. It just looked like Stavro fell 
on Falka and then suddenly sprang up like a ballet dancer – he even did a kind of little ballet 
forward into the sand, which was instantly filled with blood. 

'Instincts will prevail!' cried Bonhart over the crowd. 'The reflexes work! What did I tell 
you, Houvenaghel? You will see that the bulldogs will not be necessary!' 

'What a beautiful and profitable drama.' Houvenaghel said with delight in his eyes. 

Stavro rose to his arms, trembling with the effort, threw his head back and forth, cried, 
gasped, spat blood and fell back on the sand. 

'What was this blow, Mr. Bonhart?' The Marquise de-Nementh Uyvar croaked while 
lustfully rubbing her knees together. 

'That was an improvisation.' Under the lips that answered the Marquise's question, teeth 
flashed. 'A beautiful, creative and, one could say, almost visceral improvisation. I've heard of 
a place where they teach such improvised abdominal strikes. I bet that our young lady knows 
this place. I know who she is.' 

'Force me not,' cried Ciri in a truly spooky tone. 'I will not! Do you hear me? I will not!' 

'This woman comes from hell!' Amaranth cleverly jumped over the barrier and 
immediately circled the arena to distract Ciri from noticing Dreadlocks, who also jumping 
into the pit. Horsehide jumped across the barrier after Dreadlocks. 

'Unfair play!' cried the Mayor Pennycuick, and the crowd alongside him. 'Three against 
one! Unfair play!' 

Bonhart smiled. The Marquise licked her lips and began to move her legs more violently 
back and forth. 

The plan of the three was simple – force the little girl to retreat against the bar, and then 
two would block her while the third killed her. Nothing came of it. For one simple reason. 
The girl did not retreat, but attacked. 

She slid a pirouette dance between them, so fluid that she barely touched the sand. She hit 
Dreadlocks in passing, and he fell down right there. She had hit him at the carotid artery. The 
blow was so light that she did not even lose her rhythm, she was so elegant and so quick that 
the opposite rotation was over before a single drop of blood had splashed from the newly 
elongated neck of Dreadlocks. Amaranth, who was behind her, wanted to beat her in the 
neck, but the treacherous blow hit a parry on the back of the curved sword. Ciri turned off, 
sprung, and struck a blow with both hands, which was reinforced with a sharp hip flexion to 
give it even more power. The dark Gnome blade was like a razor, she slit open his hissing 
and smacking stomach. Amaranth howled and fell huddled in the sand. Horsehide approached 
and jumped, trying to cut the little girl's throat. She fell, but with a twist. She turned fluently 
and gave him a short cut with the middle of the blade to split his face, eye, nose, mouth and 
chin. 


The audience roared, whistled, stomped and howled. The Marquise de-Nementh Uyvar 
put both hands between her clenched legs, licked her glossy lips and laughed in nervous 
contralto. The Nilfgaardian Captain of the Reserve was as pale as vellum paper. A woman 
was trying to cover her child's eyes with her hands – he was trying to break free. A gray-
haired old grandfather in the front row threw up violently and noisily, his head down between 
his knees. 

Horsehide sobbed with his hands on the face. From under his fingers oozed blood mixed 
with mucus and saliva. Amaranth was rolling and squealing like a pig. Dreadlocks was trying 
to claw his way over the bars, which were slippery with the blood that spurted out of him to 
the beat of his heart. 

'Heeeellp mee!' wailed Amaranth while frantically trying to hold in his bulging viscera. 
'Coomraaadeesds! Heelp meeeee!' 

'Ple... leeeas... eeaseee...' Horsehide spat and vomited blood. 

'KILL-THEM! KILL-THEM!' chanted the crowd and stomped to the beat. The old man 
who had vomited pushed off his bench and kicked at the balcony. 

'Diamonds to nuts,' came Bonhart's mocking bass amidst the bustle, 'that no one dares to 
go into the arena anymore. Diamonds to nuts, Imbra! Oh, what am I saying – even diamonds 
to numb nuts!' 

'KILL-THEM!' Roaring, stomping, clapping. 'KILL-THEM!' 

'Miss!' Windsor Imbra shouted and waved at his subordinates. 'Let us gather the 
wounded! Let us come into the arena and carry them away before they bleed and die! Be a 
man, young lady!' 

'A man,' Ciri repeated, as she felt adrenaline bubble up within her. She quickly 
dominated it by exhaling several times as she had been taught. 

'Come in and get them,' she said. 'But come without weapons. You too are human. At 
least this once.' 

'NO,' yelled and chanted the crowd. 'KILL! KILL!' 

'You vile beasts!' Ciri turned and let her soft eyes wander over the bleachers and 
benches. 'You unappreciative pigs! You rascals! You mangy bastards! You want blood? 
Come on, come on down – taste it and smell it! Lick it before it dries up! Brutes! Vampires!' 

The Marquise moaned, began to tremble, rolled her eyes, and leaned softly on Bonhart, 
without taking her hand from between her thighs. Bonhart frowned and pushed her away, 
trying not to feel tactless. The crowd howled. Someone threw a half-eaten sausage in the 
arena, another one threw a boot, and then someone even threw a cucumber at Ciri. She cut the 
cucumber through the middle with her sword, which was greeted with even greater outcry. 


Windsor Imbra and his men lifted Amaranth and Horsehide. When they moved 
Amaranth, he began to roar. Horsehide, however, fainted. Dreadlocks and Stavro no longer 
showed any signs of life. Ciri withdrew herself as far as possible, as far as the arena allowed. 
Imbra's people also strove to keep their distance. 

Imbra Windsor stood motionless. He looked at Ciri from under lowered eyelids, but his 
hand was on the handle of the sword he had promised not to draw when he had entered the 
arena. 

'No,' she warned him, almost without moving her lips. 'I do not want to. Please.' 

Imbra was pale. The crowd stomped, roared, and howled. 

'Do not listen to her,' shouted Bonhart over the noise. 'Draw your sword! Or else show 
the world that you're a coward and a pants-pisser! From Alba to the Yaruga people will hear 
that Windsor Imbra ran away from an underage girl – like a dog with his tail between his 
legs!' 

Imbra's blade slid an inch from its sheath. 'No,' said Ciri. The blade slid back. 

'Coward!' shouted someone from the crowd. 'Coward! Chicken shit!' 

With a stony face, Imbra approached the edge of the arena. Down in front of him were the 
outstretched hands of his comrades that had attacked her. He looked back once. 

'You probably already know what awaits you, girl,' he said quietly. 'You probably 
already know who Leo Bonhart is. You probably already know what Leo Bonhart is capable 
of. What excites him. More will come to face you in the arena. You'll kill for the pleasure of 
pigs and rags like those here. And even worse. And if it does not entertain them when you 
kill, or if Bonhart grows bored of the violence perpetrated by you, then he will kill you. He 
will send so many into the arena that you won't be able to cover your back. He will rush you, 
or send dogs. The dogs will tear you apart, the mob will smell blood and applaud, and you 
will bleed out on the dirty sand. Just as you have done to these ones today. Think on my 
words.' 

Strangely, only now did she notice the little pin on his enamelled collar. 

An upturned silver unicorn in a black box. 

A unicorn. 

Ciri lowered her head. She looked at the sword blade. 

Suddenly it became very quiet. 

'By the Great Sun,' suddenly cried Declan Ros aep Maelchlad, the Nilfgaardian Captain 
of the Reserve, who had hitherto been silent. 'No. Do not do that, girl. Ne tuv'en que'ss, 
Luned!' 


Ciri swallowed and slowly turned her hand around, resting the hilt on the sand. She bent 
her knees. With her right hand holding the blade, the tip was aimed precisely under her left 
breastbone. The blade pierced through her clothing. 

Just do not start to cry, thought Ciri as she pressed more strongly against the sword. Just 
do not cry, there's nothing I would need or want to cry about. A violent movement and it's all 
over... 

'You cannot do it,' Bonhart's voice was heard in the perfect silence. 'You cannot do it, 
witcheress. In Kaer Morhen they taught you to kill, so you kill like a machine. Instinctively. 
To kill yourself takes character, strength, determination, and courage. But that they could not 
teach you.' 

 

*** 

 

'As you see, he was right,' admitted Ciri with difficulty. 'I have not managed to.' 

Vysogota was silent. He held a muskrat pelt. Motionless. He had been sitting so for a long 
time. He had almost forgotten that pelt existed. 

'I chickened out. I was a coward. And I've paid for it. Like any coward pays. With pain, 
shame, and disgusting submission. And terrible self loathing...' 

Vysogota remained silent. 

 

*** 

 

If someone had managed to sneak at night to the cabin with a sagging thatch roof, and if 
they had peeked through a crack in the shutters, they would have seen, in the dimly lit 
interior, a gray-bearded old man and an ash-blonde girl sitting by a fireplace. They would 
have noticed that both were silently gazing at the glowing ruby red coals. 

But no one could see that. The hut with the mossy thatch roof was well hidden in the fog 
and the haze, amid boundless reeds in the marshes of Pereplut, where no one dared enter. 

 

*** 

 

 


 Whoever sheds the blood of man, by man shall his blood be shed. 

 

Genesis 9.6 


 
Many that live deserve death. And some that die deserve life. Can you give it to them? Then 
do not be too eager to deal out death in judgment. For even the very wise cannot see all ends. 

 

J.R.R. Tolkien 


 
Indeed, it requires great pride and great blindness to call the blood that flows from the 
scaffold Justice. 

 

Vysogota of Corvo 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


