Chapter Three 

 

 

It happened on the fifth day of September, after the new moon, on exactly the thirtieth day 
of our expedition – beginning with our departure from Brokilon, and six days after the Battle 
on the Bridge. 

 Now, my future readers, I will go back in time a little and describe the events that took 
place immediately after the glorious and momentous Battle on the Bridge. First, however, I 
want to bring a number of readers into the picture, those that have no knowledge of the Battle 
of the Bridge – whether it be due to other interests or as a result of general ignorance. So: 
That battle took place on the last day of August during the Great War. It was fought in 
Angren, on the bridge connecting the two shores of the river Yaruga near a fortress called 
the Red Binduga. The forces in that armed conflict were: the Army of Nilfgaard, The Army 
Corps of Lyria – led by Queen Meve, and us, our wonderful company – myself, the writer of 
these lines, the witcher Geralt, the vampire Emiel Regis Rohellec Terzieff-Godefroy, the 
archer Maria Barring , called Milva, and Cahir Mawr Dyffryn aep Ceallach, a Nilfgaardian 
who tended to stress, with an obstinacy that was worthy a better cause, that he was not a 
Nilfgaardian. 

You, reader, might be unclear on how the Queen came be alive and in Angren, as you 
may have heard that she disappeared and perished along with her army when the 
Nilfgaardians thrust into Lyria, Rivia and Aedirn in July, which ended with the complete 
subjugation of those countries and their occupation by Imperial troops. Meve was not, 
however, killed in battle as was supposed, nor even taken into Nilfgaardian captivity. After 
they had regrouped, the brave Meve and a large portion of the survivors of the Lyrian Army 
recruited everyone they could, including mercenaries and ordinary bandits, and launched a 
guerrilla war against Nilfgaard. And wild Angren suited such a guerrilla war ideally – 
whether they needed a thicket to spring an ambush from or a thicket to hide in, Angren 
accommodated them. Because in Angren there are thickets everywhere. In fact, there is 
nothing in that area worth mentioning, except the thickets. 

Meve's Crowd – which the army of the White Queen became known as – grew rapidly in 
strength and developed such bravado that they fearlessly crossed to the left bank of the 
Yaruga, deep behind enemy lines, in order to camp and harass the enemy to their heart's 
desire. 

Here we return to our subject, namely the Battle on the Bridge. The tactical situation 
looked like this: Queen Meve's forces, after having camped on the left bank of the Yaruga for 
some time, wanted to flee to the right bank. However, they met a group of Nilfgaardians on 
the bridge who, after having camped on the right bank of the Yaruga for some time, wanted 
to flee to the left bank. We entered the above-mentioned situation from a central position, 
that is, starting from the middle of the river Yaruga and surrounded by armed men on both 


sides, right and left. Since we could thus escape to nowhere, we became heroes, covered with 
immortal fame. The battle was won by the Lyrians because they achieved what they intended, 
namely to escape to the right bank. The Nilfgaardians, who had fled in an unknown direction, 
had lost the battle. I realize that this all sounds pretty confusing and I promise to consult a 
military theorist before publishing. For now I am relying on the authority of Cahir aep 
Ceallach, the only soldier in our company – and Cahir has confirmed that, from the 
perspective of most military doctrines, winning a battle through the rapid escape of the 
battlefield is allowed. 

Without a doubt, our company's part in the battle was glorious, however it had some 
negative effects. Milva, who was pregnant, suffered a tragic accident. Luck was kind enough 
to hold for the rest of us and no one else suffered serious harm. However, it soon wore off 
because we received no rewards, only thanks. The exception was the witcher Geralt. 
Because, contrary to his often proclaimed – and, as you can see, hypocritical – indifferent 
attitude and his often declared neutrality, the witcher Geralt displayed equally large and 
overly-spectacular zeal on the battlefield. In other words: He fought so remarkably well that 
it was impossible not to notice. And indeed, it did not go unnoticed – Meve, the Queen of 
Lyria, personally knighted him. However, this accolade soon revealed more inconveniences 
than advantages. 

You must know, dear reader, that the witcher Geralt was always a modest, 
uncomplicated, balanced, and controlled man, who kept his feelings to himself and was as 
straightforward as a halberd shaft. However, the unexpected promotion and apparent favour 
of Queen Meve changed him – had I not known him better, I would have said that the glory 
had gone to his head. Rather than quickly and anonymously vanishing from the scene, Geralt 
rode around in the royal camp, delighting in the honour, enjoying the patronage and basking 
in the glory. 

But fame and attention were the last things we needed. To those to who have forgotten, I 
call to mind that the afore-mentioned witcher Geralt, now knighted, was wanted in 
connection to the uprising on Thanedd, the island of magicians, by the intelligence services of 
all four kingdoms. To me, a person who has never been guilty of anything, they tried to attach 
the charge of espionage. In addition was Milva who, as it turned out, had collaborated with 
the Dryads and the Scioa'tael and had been involved in the infamous massacres of people on 
the edges of Brokilon Forest. On top of that was Cahir aep Ceallach, the Nilfgaardian who 
was, after all, a citizen of a hostile country, and whose presence on the wrong side of the 
front would not be easy to explicate and justify. As it turned out, the only member of our 
company whose career was not tainted with political or criminal affairs, was a vampire. 
Therefore, it was sufficient that only one of us needed to be exposed and identified in order to 
bring sharpened aspen stakes on all of us. Every day we spent in the shadow of Lyrian flags – 
which at first were spent comfortably, well fed and safe, by the way – increased the risk. 

When I strongly reminded Geralt of this, his face darkened a little, but he presented his 
motives to me, of which he had two. First, Milva still needed nursing and care after her 
unfortunate accident and there were field medics with the army. Second, Queen Meve's army 


was travelling east, towards Caed Dhu. Before our company had been forced to change 
direction and had been caught in the battle described above, we had also been travelling 
east, towards Caed Dhu – because we were hoping the Druids who live there could give us 
information that would be useful in the search for Ciri. Rampant horsemen and marauding 
mercenaries in Angren had been the reason we were forced to stray from the straight path to 
the Druids. Now, under the protection of friendly Lyrian army, and with the favour and 
affection of Queen Meve, we could openly travel the way to Caed Dhu, easily and safely. 

I warned the witcher that the Queen's apparent favour was fickle and deceptive. The 
witcher would not listen. However, it was soon shown who was right. When news arrived 
from the east that a Nilfgaardian punitive expedition was marching to Angren from Klamat 
pass, the Lyrian army turned north without hesitation, towards Mahakam. As one can easily 
imagine, Geralt did not like this change of direction – he wanted to reach the Druids as 
quickly as possible, not Mahakam! Naive as a child, he rushed to Queen Meve to receive a 
discharge from the army and the royal blessing for his private affairs. And at that moment the 
royal grace and favour came to an end, and the respect and admiration for the heroes of the 
Battle on the Bridge scattered like smoke. The knight Geralt of Riva was reminded in a cold, 
but firm tone of his duties to the Crown. The still-ailing Milva, the vampire Regis and the 
author of these lines were advised to join the column of refugees and civilians who followed 
the camp. Cahir aep Ceallach, a tall young man who looked nothing like a civilian, had a 
blue and white sash tied to him and was assigned to the so-called Free Company – a cavalry 
unit comprised of all sorts of scum the Lyrian Corps had picked up along the way. And so we 
were separated and it looked like it our expedition had come to a definite and irrevocable 
conclusion. 

As you can imagine, dear reader, that was by no means the end. Yes, it was not even the 
beginning! As soon as Milva learned of the development of things, she immediately declared 
herself to be healthy and fit for travel – and issued the watchword to escape at the first 
opportunity. Cahir threw the royal colours in the bushes and disappeared from the Free 
Company, and advised Geralt to do the same from the exquisite luxury tents of the 
knighthood. 

 I will not indulge details about myself – my modesty does not allow me to highlight my 
own achievements in the company's escape – though they were not small. I will only state the 
facts: On the night between September fifth and sixth, our company quietly left the Corps of 
Queen Meve. Before we said farewell to the Lyrian army, we did not miss the opportunity to 
restock our provisions, where we were caught without permission by the quartermaster. 
Milva used the word 'robbery', but I think it is too strong. After all, we deserved a bonus for 
our participation in the memorable Battle for the Bridge. And if not a reward, at least 
satisfaction and compensation for the losses suffered. Apart from Milva's tragic accident and 
the numerous injuries and wounds Geralt and Cahir had sustained, all of our horses had 
been killed or maimed in the battle – excepting my trusty Pegasus and the wayward Roach, 
the mare of the witcher. So, as recompense, we took three thoroughbred horses and a pack 
horse. We also provided ourselves with as much equipment as we could fit into our hands – in 
fairness I should add that we threw half of it away later. As Milva noted before we started, if 


you steal in the dark, you don't know what you are getting. The most fiscally useful things 
came from the cache of the vampire, who sees better in darkness than in daylight. Regis also 
reduced the combat power of the Lyrian army by one fat, mouse gray mule, which he so ably 
led from the camp that not once did the animal neigh or stamp. Therefore, the stories of how 
animals sense vampires and react to their smell with panic must be dismissed as a myth – at 
least when it comes to certain animals and certain vampires. I should add that we still have 
this mouse-gray mule today. Later, after the pack horse was frightened by wolves and 
abandoned us in the forests of Riverdell, the mule bore all of our belongings – or rather what 
was left of them. The mule is called Draakula. It received the name from Regis just after he 
had stolen it, and retains it to this day. The name obviously amused Regis, and must surely 
have had some humorous meaning in the culture and language of vampires, but when we 
wanted him to explain it to us, he claimed that it was an untranslatable play on words. 

 So our company was on the road again, and the already lengthy list of people who had 
something against us had become even longer. Geralt of Rivia, the knight without fear and 
without reproach, left the ranks of knighthood before his accolade was notarized and before 
the heraldic coat of arms he had devised was patented. Cahir aep Ceallach – who had 
already fought with, and deserted, armies on both sides of the Great War between the 
Northern Kingdoms and Nilfgaard – had earned himself death sentences in absentia from 
both. The rest of us were in no better positions – the noose is the noose, and it is ultimately 
not a big difference, the only difference is for what – for defilement of chivalry, desertion, or 
that you have given a military-mule the name of Draakula. 

 It should not surprise you then, reader, that we displayed truly titanic efforts to increase 
and maximize the distance between us and the Corps of Queen Meve. 

With the borrowed horses, we rode south to Yaruga and crossed over to the left bank. 
Certainly not only to put the river between us and the Queen with her guerrillas, but because 
the solitude of Riverdell was far less dangerous than the war-captured Angren. And so we 
logically travelled to the Druids of Caed Dhu on the left bank instead of on the right. 
Paradoxically – because the left bank of the Yaruga already belonged to the enemy, The 
Empire of Nilfgaard. The father of the concept to travel the left bank was the witcher Geralt, 
who, after resigning from the brotherhood of knightly braggarts, had recovered a 
considerable extent of his rational, logical thinking and his usual caution. The future showed 
that the witcher's plan was momentous and strongly influenced the fate of the whole 
expedition. More about that later. 

When we arrived at the Yaruga, Nilfgaardians were already swarming over the 
reconstructed bridge at Red Binduga. They were marching to continue their offensive in 
Angren – and then on to Temeria, Mahakam and the devil knows where or what else the 
Nilfgaardian General Staff had planned. There could be no question of crossing the river 
during the march, we had to keep hidden and wait until the troops were gone. Two whole 
days we sat in a willow thicket by the river, cultivating rheumatism and feeding the 
mosquitoes. To add to the unhappiness, the weather took a turn for the worse. It was 
drizzling, there was a disgusting wind, and it was so cold that our teeth chattered. I cannot 


remember such a cold September, even though I have many of those months in my memory. It 
was then, dear reader, that I rummaged through the equipment that we had borrowed from 
the Lyrian camp, found a pencil and paper, and began – to kill time and forget the 
inconveniences – to write down and eternalize some of our adventures. 

The depressing rainy weather and the forced idleness spoiled the mood and provoked 
dark thoughts to arise in us. Especially in the witcher. Geralt had earlier acquired the habit 
of calculating the days he had been separated from Ciri – and every day that he was not 
travelling, as he said, separated them more and more. Well, in the wet willows, in the cold 
and the rain, the witcher grew darker and more grim by the hour. I also noticed that he was 
limping badly, and if he believed that no one can see or hear him, he cursed and hissed in 
pain. You must know, dear reader, that Geralt's bone had been shattered during the 
conference of mages on Thanedd. The fractures had mended and healed, thanks to the 
magical efforts of the Dryads of Brokilon Forest, but clearly still presented difficulties. So the 
witcher suffered, as they say, both physical and emotional pain, and he was so furious that he 
preferred to be ignored. 

And again dreams began to haunt him. On the ninth of September – the morning, because 
he had stood guard all night and had not slept until then – he terrorized us all, for he jumped 
up with a cry and drew the sword. He looked like he was about to go berserk, but luckily he 
caught himself immediately. 

He walked away, and came back soon after with surly face, proposing no more and no 
less than to immediately dissolve the company and to go on alone himself, because 
somewhere a terrible event had happened and time was short. He said it would be dangerous 
and he would not force anyone to take responsibility for anyone else. He spoke and grumbled 
so bleakly and without conviction that no one wanted to discuss it with him. 

The usually eloquent vampire dismissed him with a shrug, Milva spat, and Cahir dryly 
recalled that he had already attempted to travel alone, but, in regards the risk, said that he 
who wears the sword should not complain about the belt. And then they all fell silent and 
focused their attention on the significant writer of these lines, no doubt expecting that I would 
take the opportunity to return home. I need not add that they were very mistaken. 

The event, however, led us to make an end to our miasma, and provided the impetus for a 
bold act – crossing the Yaruga. I confess that I worried about the operation – the plan called 
for, namely, crossing the river at night while swimming, or, as Milva and Cahir put it, 'being 
towed by the horse's cocks'. Even if they were speaking metaphorically – and I suspect that 
they were – I could not imagine myself on such a crossing on my gelding Pegasus, on whose 
cock I would have to rely. Swimming, generally speaking, was not and is not my particular 
strength. If Mother Nature had intended that I swim, she would have, over the course of 
evolution, equipped me with webbed fingers and toes. The same thing was true of Pegasus. 

My fears proved unfounded – at least when it came to be towed by a horse's cock. We 
crossed over a different way. Who knows, perhaps it was even more insane. In a truly bold 
way – on the reconstructed bridge at Red Binduga, right under the eyes of Nilfgaardian 


guards and patrols. It turns out that the operation only appeared to be insane insolence and a 
deadly game of chance, when in fact, everything went like clockwork. Following the infantry 
lines across the bridge was a caravan of transport wagons, cattle herds, and all sorts of 
people, including people in plain clothes, with whom our company blended right in, 
unnoticed. And so on the tenth day of September we rode across to the left bank of the 
Yaruga. Only once were we questioned by a sentry, who Cahir, with a domineering frown, 
bluffed with the threat of some imperial service, underscoring his words with the traditional 
military and always effective salutation of 'son of a bitch'. Before anyone arrived to 
investigate us, we were already on the left bank of the Yaruga, deep in the forests of Riverdell 
– where there was only one highway, leading south. To us, neither the direction of the 
highway nor the number of Nilfgaardians travelling on it was convenient. 

At the first camp in the woods of Riverdell, I also had a strange dream – unlike Geralt I 
dreamed not of Ciri, but of the sorceress Yennefer. The dream was strange, worrisome – 
Yennefer was dressed, as usual, in black and white and flew through the air over a dark, 
small, mountain castle, while other sorceresses underneath her shook their fists at her and 
shouted insults. Yennefer waved the long sleeves of her dress and flew away like a black 
albatross, out into a boundless sea, opposite the rising sun. From that moment on, the dream 
became a nightmare. Upon awakening, the details had vanished from my memory. They 
remained only as unclear images with little meaning, but those images were monstrous – 
torture, screams, pain, fear, death... In a word: horror. 

I kept my dream from Geralt. I did not say a word. As it later turned out, I was right. 

 

*** 

 

'Yennefer, she was called! Yennefer of Vengerberg. A powerful and famous sorceress! 
May I fall down dead on the spot if I lie!' 

Triss Merigold started and turned around, trying to see through the crowd and the blue 
smoke that filled the main hall of the tavern. Finally she got up from the table, leaving 
behind, with some regret, the fillet of sole with anchovy paste, a local specialty and true 
delicacy. She wasn't visiting the taverns and inns Bremervoord to eat delicacies, but to gather 
information. She also had to pay attention to her schedule. 

The circle of people she had to push her way through was already densely crowded – in 
Bremervoord people loved stories and took advantage of every opportunity to hear a new 
one. And the many sailors who came here never disappointed – they always had a fresh 
repertoire of anecdotes and yarns. Of course, they were fictitious for the most part, but that 
didn't matter. A story is a story. It has its own rules. 

The woman who was telling the story – and had mentioned Yennefer – was a 
fisherwoman from the Skellig Islands. She was stocky and broad-shouldered, wore her hair 


cropped short , and was dressed, like her four companions, in a whale skin vest that was so 
worn that it gleamed. 

'It was the morning of the nineteenth day of August, after the second night of the full 
moon,' the woman from the islands put the mug to her lips while telling her story. Her hand, 
Triss noticed, was the colour of old bricks, and her bare, gnarled, muscle-laced arm probably 
measured twenty inches in circumference. Triss had a waist circumference of twenty-two 
inches. 

'At first light,' said the fisherwoman as she cast a look at the faces of her audience, 'we 
drove our barge into the sound between Ard Skellig and Spikeroog, on the oyster bed where 
we usually deploy our salmon nets. We were in a hurry because the western sky was mighty 
dark and it looked like a storm was brewing. We needed to take the salmon from the nets as 
quickly as possible, or else – you know how it is, when you can finally run out after a storm 
is finished and the only things in the nets are eroded heads, the entire catch is over.' 

The audience, mostly residents of Bremervoord and Cidaris, people who lived by the sea 
and whose existence depended on it, nodded and murmured sympathetically. Triss usually 
only took salmon in the form of slices to her mouth, but she nodded and murmured too, so 
she would not attract attention. She was here incognito, on a secret mission. 

'We had arrived,' continued the fisherwoman, after she had emptied her pitcher and 
gestured that one of the listeners should buy her a second. 'We had arrived and was just about 
haul in the nets and catches when Gudrun, the daughter of Sturli, shouts out loud! And points 
a finger to starboard! We look back and see something black fly through the air, but it's not a 
bird! For a moment my heart stopped, because I immediately thought, this is a Wyvern or a 
small Slyzard, which, of course, are sometimes known to fly to Spikeroog, especially in 
winter and particularly on the west wind. But now the black thing splashes into the water! 
And sends up a four foot wave: Whoosh! Right into our nets. It's caught in a net in the water 
and wriggling like a seal, because it took all we all had, everyone who was there, and we 
were eight women! It took all of our power to jerk and bang it onto the deck! And only then 
did we unlock our mouths! Because it was a woman! In a black dress, with hair as black as a 
crow. Rolled into the net between two salmon, one of which, as I sit here, was twenty-four 
and a half pounds!' 

The fisherwoman from the Skellig Islands blew the froth from a new pitcher and took a 
swig. None of the listeners said or expressed disbelief, although even the oldest people could 
not remember a salmon of so impressive weight ever having been caught. 

'The Black Hair in the nets,' continued the woman from the islands, 'coughs, spits water, 
and pulls the net, and Gudrun, nervous because she is pregnant, starts screaming, 'A Kelpie! 
A Kelpie! A Mermaid!', but any fool could see this was no kelpie, for a kelpie would have 
long since torn the net, and how could such a monster have been drawn onto the boat! And a 
mermaid it was not, because it had no fish tail, and mermaids always have fish tails! And 
then she fell from the sky into the sea, and who has ever seen a kelpie or a mermaid that flies 
in the sky? But Skadi, the daughter of Una, who can't think for herself, also starts crying, 'A 


Kelpie!', and already she reaches for a boat hook! And starts swinging the boat hook at the 
nets! But from the net, there is a blue flash, and there Skadi flies off squealing! Boat hook to 
the left, Skadi to the right, I will drop dead if I lie, she does three somersaults and smacks her 
but into the deck! Ha, as it turned out, it was a sorceress in the net, as bad as a medusa, a 
scorpion or an electric eel! And then the witch is on the defensive and also begins to scream 
and curse at us! And the net hisses and smokes and everything stinks because it's so magical! 
We see that this is no fun...' 

The woman from the islands emptied her pitcher and immediately started on the next. 

'That it's no fun' – she belched loudly, wiping her nose and mouth with the back of her 
hand – 'a magician, and we have her caught in the nets! I'll note that this magic, as I sit here, 
is already beginning to rock the barge. So there was no hesitation! Britta, the daughter of 
Karen, has grabbed the net with a boat hook, and I grabbed an oar and start to give it to her! 
Give it to her! Give it to her!' 

The beer foamed up and spilled out onto the table, and a couple of pitchers toppled to the 
ground. The audience wiped their cheeks and brows, but no one said a word of complaint or 
reproach. A story is a story. It has its own rules. 

'Then the witch understood who she was dealing with.' The fisherwoman thumped 
herself in her large chest, looking around defiantly. 'Not to be trifled with, the women of 
Skellige is! She says that she surrenders to us and promises she will release any enchantments 
or spells. And she says to call her by her name: Yennefer of Vengerberg.' 

The audience began to murmur. Hardly two months had passed since the events on 
Thanedd Island, and they still remembered the names of the Nilfgaard-bought traitors. 
Especially the famous Yennefer. 

'We had her,' the woman from the islands continued, 'brought her from Ard Skellig to 
Kaer Trolde, to the earl Crach an Craite. Since then I have not seen her. The earl was away on 
a trip, it is said, and when he came back the magician was severely received, but later he 
treated her politely and kindly. Hmmm... But I've just been waiting for a vengeful surprise for 
me from the sorceress, cause I walloped her one with the oar. I thought she might blacken me 
to the Earl. But no. She didn't speak a word of complaint that I know of. A decent woman. 
Later, when she killed herself, I even felt sorry for her...' 

'Yennefer is no longer alive?' called Triss who, in her fright, forgot her secret mission 
and the fact that she was supposed to be incognito. 'Yennefer of Vengerberg is no longer 
alive?' 

'Well, she lives no longer.' The fisherwoman drank her beer. 'She's as dead as a 
mackerel. She killed herself with her own magic, when she was performing magic tricks. It 
was only recently, on the last day of August, just before the new moon. But that's a whole 
different story...' 

 


*** 

 

'Dandelion! Do not sleep in the saddle!' 

'I am not sleeping! I am thinking creatively!' 

Thus we rode, dear reader, through the forests of Riverdell, to the east, towards Caed 
Dhu, in search of the druids that could help us find Ciri. Why we behaved so terribly, I will 
tell. First, however, I want to write, in the interest of historical truth, about our company – 
and its individual members. 

The vampire Regis was about four hundred years old. If he was not lying, this meant that 
he was the oldest of us all. Of course, it could be an ordinary swindle, for who among us 
would be able to verify it? But I preferred to believe that our vampire was telling the truth, 
because he had also told us that he had irrevocably abandoned the practice of drinking 
human blood – and thanks to this statement, we slept a little easier at night. Initially I noticed 
that Milva and Cahir tended to timidly rub their necks after waking, but they stopped that 
quickly. Regis was – or seemed to be – a vampire of absolute honour. He had vowed he 
would not suck blood, therefore he sucked none. 

However, he had his weaknesses, and I do not mean those that grew out of his vampiric 
nature. Regis was an intellectual and demonstrated this often. He had the unnerving habit of 
announcing allegations and truths with the tone and air of a prophet, to which we soon 
stopped responding, because the announced allegations either actually were true, or at least 
seemed to be sound, or they were unable to be verified, which amounted to the same thing. 
Regis's most unbearable mannerism was that he would answer a question before the 
questioner had finished with the formulation of his question – or sometimes even before the 
questioner had begun the formulation. I've always held this supposed evidence of high 
intelligence is instead evidence of rudeness and arrogance, properties that fit well in the 
university environment or circles at court, but are difficult to endure from a companion with 
whom you spend the day riding stirrup to stirrup, and the nights sleeping in the same camp. 
Thanks to Milva, however, no one got seriously upset by this. In contrast to Geralt and Cahir, 
who seemed to be prompted to adopt the style of the vampire and even to compete with him in 
this regard, the archer Milva enacted a simple and unpretentious solution. The third time she 
noticed him answer her in the middle of a question, she swore at him vigorously, using words 
and descriptions that could even drive an old trooper to blush with shame. And, wonder of 
wonders, it helped – the vampire laid aside the enervating style in a jiffy. The lesson learned 
was that the most effective defence against an attempt of intellectual dominance is to make 
the intellectual who wants to dominate, properly let out the pig. 

I have the impression that Milva was having difficulty coping with her tragic accident and 
loss. I write: I have the impression, as I am aware that I, as a man, may have no idea what 
such an accident and such a loss means for a woman. Although I am a poet and a man of the 


pen, even my trained and experienced imagination fails here, and I cannot do anything about 
it. 

The archer regained her physical capacity soon – with the psychological it looked worse. 
She would not say a word for whole days, from morning to night. She would gladly disappear 
and hold herself apart, which started to worry everyone a little. But at last came the change 
for the better. Milva reacted like a Dryad or an elf – violent, impulsive and hard to 
understand. One morning, before our eyes, she pulled out her knife and, without a word, cut 
off the braid at the nape of her neck. 'I do not deserve this, because I'm not a virgin,' she said 
when she saw us watching open-mouthed. 'And also not a widow,' she added, 'this concludes 
my mourning.' From that moment on she was like before – harsh, caustic, with a loose 
tongue and with quick access to words not socially acceptable. What we concluded was that 
she really had gotten over the crisis. 

The third and no less strange member of our company was a Nilfgaardian, who wanted to 
prove that he was not a Nilfgaardian. Cahir Mawr Dyffryn aep Ceallach, as he claimed... 

 

*** 

 

'Cahir Mawr Dyffryn, son of Ceallach' Dandelion said emphatically, as he aimed the 
little lead pencil at the Nilfgaardian. 'I have to accept a lot of things in this highly esteemed 
company that I do not like, things that I almost cannot stand. But not this! I cannot stand it 
when someone watches over my shoulder while I am writing! And I do not intend to accept 
it!' 

The Nilfgaardian moved away from the poet and, after a brief reflection, grabbed his 
saddle and blanket coat, and pulled them closer to Milva, who appeared to be dozing. 

'Sorry,' he said. 'Forgive the intrusion, Dandelion. I sat looking quite automatically, from 
ordinary curiosity. I thought you were drawing a map or making calculations.' 

'I'm not an accountant!' The poet jumped up, literally and figuratively. 'And not a 
cartographer! And even if I were, it would not justify you impersonating a crane to spy on my 
notes!' 

'I've already apologized,' Cahir reminded him dryly, as he set up his camp at the new 
location. 'I've come to terms with things and gotten used to many things in this highly 
esteemed company. But I still maintain that I only have to apologize once.' 

'Indeed,' the witcher agreed, which surprised everyone, including the young Nilfgaardian. 
'You've become damned irritable, Dandelion. It's obvious that it's somehow related to the 
paper you recently besmirched with that piece of lead.' 


'True,' confirmed the vampire Regis, as he added some birch twigs to the fire. 'Our 
Minstrel has recently become irritable and anxious to have closed, discrete seclusion. But no, 
in carrying out his natural needs witnesses cannot interfere, which incidentally in our 
situation is not surprising. The bashful seclusion and irritability over prying eyes relate 
exclusively to the described paper and use of the stylus. I wonder if he seals our presence in a 
poem? A rhapsody? An epic? A romance? A stanza?' 

'No,' said Geralt as he moved closer to the fire and threw a blanket over his shoulders. 'I 
know him. This can't be poetic speech, because he is not blaspheming, muttering to himself, 
or counting syllables on his fingers. He stopped writing, so it's prose.' 

'Prose,' the vampire flashed his sharp canine teeth, which he usually tried to avoid. 'A 
novel perhaps? Or an essay? A morality? Damn it Dandelion! Stop torturing me! Tell me 
what you write?' 

'Memoirs.' 

'How?' 

'From these notes' – Dandelion showed them a tube filled with papers – 'my life's work 
will be created. Memoirs under the title Fifty Years of Poetry.' 

'A silly title,' Cahir said dryly. 'Poetry has no age.' 

'And if you insist that it has one,' added the Vampire, 'then it is decidedly older.' 

'You don't understand. The title means that the author of the work has spent fifty years, 
no more and no less, in the service of his mistress, poetry.' 

'Then it is even greater nonsense' said the witcher. 'You, Dandelion, are still not forty. 
Writing was drummed into you in the temple-cliff school with a cane in the butt when you 
were eight. Even if we assume that you have written rhymes ever since, you've served your 
mistress poetry no longer than thirty years. But I don't have to assume, because you yourself 
have frequently said that you started seriously rhyming and composing melodies when you 
were nineteen, inspired by the love of Countess de Stael. That makes one less than twenty 
years of service, Dandelion. So from which sleeve are you shaking out these fifty years 
mentioned in the title? Is it supposed to be a metaphor?' 

'I,' the bard said grandly, 'grasp intellectually wide horizons. I describe the present, but 
reach into the future. The work that I am undertaking, I think to publish in about twenty to 
thirty years, and then no one can dispute the statement in the title.' 

'Aha. Now I understand. What amazes me is the foresight. You usually care little for the 
morrow.' 

'I still care little about the morrow,' the poet declared condescendingly. 'I think of the 
afterlife. And of eternity!' 


'At least from the point of view of future generations,' Regis said, 'it is not very ethical to 
begin the writing now. Future generations may expect that a work with such a title has been 
written from a centenary perspective, an actual person who has actually had a half century of 
knowledge and experience...' 

'Someone whose experience includes half a century,' Dandelion cut him off 'must 
naturally be a seventy-year old grandfather with his brain eaten by sclerosis. When that is me 
I shall sit on the porch and fart in the wind, not dictate memoirs, because people would laugh. 
I will not make this mistake and will write my memoirs before, while I am in full possession 
of the creative forces. Later, just before the surrender, I shall make only cosmetic changes.' 

'He might have a point.' Geralt massaged his aching knee and bent it carefully. 
'Especially for us. For although we undoubtedly appear in his work, and although he has 
certainly allowed nothing good to be said about us, we won't care much in fifty years.' 

'What is a half a century?' The vampire smiled. 'A moment, a fleeting blink... Oh yes, 
Dandelion, a small note: Half a Century of Poetry in my opinion sounds better than fifty 
years.' 

'Since I do not disagree.' The troubadour bent over a sheet with a pencil and began to 
scratch it. 'I thank you, Regis. Finally, something constructive. Does anyone else have 
anything to add?' 

'I've got something.' Milva unexpectedly said and stuck her head out from under her 
blanket. 'Why are you looking at me like that? Because I can't read and write? I'm not stupid! 
We are on an expedition to come to the aid Ciri, going into an enemy country with weapons 
in our hands. It may be that Dandelion's scribblings fall into the enemy's hands. And we all 
know the rhymer, it's no secret that he's a chatterbox and a gossip. They might hang us for his 
scrawl.' 

'You are exaggerating, Milva,' the vampire said mildly. 

'Indeed, and strongly,' claimed Dandelion. 

'It also seems to me you are exaggerating,' said Cahir added carelessly. 'I do not know 
how it is with the Nordlings, but it is not a crime to possess a manuscript in the empire, and 
literary activity is not criminal.' 

Geralt gave him a sidelong look and, with a loud crash, broke the branch with which he 
had played. 'And yet libraries are set on fire in cities conquered by your cultured nation,' he 
said in an engaging tone, but with clear undertones of accusation. 'But never mind that. 
Maria, I also think you are exaggerating. Dandelion's scribbling has no meaning, as usual. 
Not for our safety.' 

'Well, I know what I know,' retorted the archer and sat up. 'Due to experience! My step-
father, when the royal treasurer was making a census, took off running, hid in the 
undergrowth, and sat there for two weeks. 'Where the scribe is, is also the judge', he always 


said, 'today they are writing to you, tomorrow they hang on you.' And he was right, although 
he was a scumbag like no other. I hope that he's stewing in hell, the son of a bitch!' 

Milva threw off the blanket and sat down by the fire, finally giving up on sleeping. It 
looked, Geralt noticed, like it would once again be a long night of conversation. 

'You did not like your stepfather, I take it,' said Dandelion after a short silence. 

'I did not.' Milva audibly gritted her teeth. 'Because he was a bastard. If my mother was 
not looking, he would run up and grope me, then claim he did nothing. So, I finally lost 
control and hit him with a rake, and as he fell I gave him a bit more – two kicks in the ribs 
and one in the course. He laid there for two whole days, spitting blood... And I ran away from 
home into the wide world, not waiting until he was healthy again. Then I heard that he died, 
and my mom shortly after he... Hey, Dandelion! Are you writing about this? Don't you dare! 
Don't you even dare, do you hear me?' 

 

*** 

 

It was strange that Milva had joined us and astonishing that the vampire kept us 
company. But the strangest – and absolutely incomprehensible – motives were from Cahir, 
who suddenly went from an enemy to something like a friend, or at least an ally. The young 
man had proved that in the Battle on the Bridge when chose, without hesitation, to side with 
the witcher against his own people. Through that act, he had finally won our favour and 
dispelled our doubts. When I write 'our', I refer to myself, the vampire and the archer. For 
although Geralt had fought shoulder to shoulder with Cahir, and although he had stood at 
his side, facing death, he still looked at the Nilfgaardian suspiciously and never considered 
him with favour. Though he sought to hide his resentment, when a person is – as I have 
probably already pointed out – as straightforward as a halberd shaft, it cannot be helped and 
at every turn the antipathy crept out like an eel from a leaky bucket. 

 The reason was obvious, and it was Ciri. 

As fate willed it I was on the island of Thanedd during the new moon in July, when the 
bloody conflict between magicians broke out. On one side were sorcerers loyal to the kings, 
on the other side were traitors incited by Nilfgaard. The traitors were supported by the 
Squirrels, rebellious elves – and by Cahir, son of Ceallach. Cahir had been sent to Thanedd 
on a special mission – to capture and kidnap Ciri. When Ciri defended herself, she wounded 
him – the sight of the scar on Cahir's hand always leaves my mouth dry. It must have hurt like 
hell, and two of the fingers still cannot bend. 

And after all that we ended up saving him from a Hawker's wagon, as his own people 
bound and took him towards a cruel execution. For what offense, I asked, were they going to 
execute him? Only because of his failure on Thanedd? Cahir is not talkative, but I have an 


ear for hints. The lad is still not even thirty, but he seems to have been a high-ranking officer 
in the Nilfgaardian Army. Since he is fluent in the common language, which is rare among 
Nilfgaardians, I think I know which branch of service Cahir was in and why he was promoted 
so quickly. And why he was entrusted with such a strange mission. A foreign mission, no less. 

Because Cahir had already attempted to kidnap Ciri. Nearly four years ago, during the 
massacre in Cintra. That was the first time he felt providence, which rules the fate of this girl. 

It was pure chance that I talked to Geralt about this. It was on the third day after we had 
crossed the Yaruga, and ten days before the equinox, as we moved through the forests of 
Riverdell. Although very short, the conversation was nevertheless full of unpleasant and 
disturbing sounds. And the witcher's face and eyes already marked him as the harbinger of 
the atrocity that later erupted on the night of the equinox, after the fair-haired Angouleme 
had joined us. 

 

*** 

 

The witcher did not look at Dandelion. He did not look forward. He looked at the Roach's 
mane. 

'Calanthe' he picked up the thread again, 'made a few knights take an oath just before she 
jumped to her death. They were not to allow Ciri to fall into Nilfgaardian hands. During the 
escape the knights were killed and Ciri was left alone in the midst of corpses and fires, in the 
narrow streets of a burning city. She would not have escaped with her life, no doubt about 
that. But he found her. He, Cahir. He grabbed her by the throat and carried her away from the 
fire. Saved her. Heroic! Noble!' 

Dandelion held Pegasus back a little. They rode in the rear – Regis, Milva and Cahir were 
a good fifty paces ahead of them, but the poet did not want even one word of this 
conversation reaching the ears of the fellowship. 

'The problem is,' continued the witcher, 'that our Cahir was commanded to be noble. He 
was as noble as the cormorant who does not gobble a caught fish because it's had a choker 
placed around its neck, making it impossible for it to swallow. He took the fish in his beak, 
but could not swallow because he had to bring it back to his master. And when he did not his 
master was angry with the cormorant! The cormorant is now in disgrace! Maybe that's why 
he now seeks the companionship and friendship of fish? What do you think, Dandelion?' 

The troubadour leaned forward in his saddle to avoid a low hanging branch of a linden 
tree. The branch's leaves were completely yellow. 

'Nevertheless he saved her life, as you have said yourself. Thanks to him, Ciri came away 
from Cintra unscathed.' 


'And cried at night because she saw him in a dream.' 

'Yet it was he who saved her. Stop trying to be so vindictive Geralt. Too much has 
changed, what am I saying, too much is changing day by day. This resentful annoyance is 
obviously no use to you. He saved Ciri. That is and remains a fact.' 

Geralt finally unlocked his gaze from Roach's mane, lifting his head. Dandelion glanced 
at his face and then hurriedly looked away. 

'The fact of the matter remains' the witcher repeated in an evil, metallic voice. 'Oh yes! 
He cried this fact to my face on Thanedd, but he was terrified when he saw my blade and the 
words got stuck in his throat. That fact and that cry should not be the case for me not to kill 
him. Well, it happened that way and cannot be changed now. Too bad. Because even then, on 
Thanedd I thought to begin a chain with him. A long chain of death, a chain of revenge, one 
which people would still be talking about after a hundred years. One that people would be 
afraid to talk about after dark. Do you understand that, Dandelion?' 

'Not particularly.' 

'Then go to the devil.' 

 

*** 

 

That conversation was disgusting, and the witcher's face was repulsive during it. Oh 
dear, I did not like it when he got into such moods, talking about stuff like that. 

I must confess, however, that after his pictorial comparison with a cormorant – I began to 
get restless. The fish in its beak, carried to Nilfgaard, where the fish was drugged, 
disembowelled and roasted! A really pleasant analogy, a real joyful outlook... 

Reason, however, spoke against such fears. Ultimately – if you stay with the fish 
parables: Who were we? Minnows, small, oily rich minnows. Cahir could not hope for 
imperial favour in exchange for such a paltry catch. He was, by the way, by no means the 
pike he wanted to present himself as. He was a minnow, just like us. Does anyone ever notice 
minnows in a time of war, when iron shapes both the world and the destinies of men? 

I'll bet my head that no one in Nilfgaard even remembers Cahir anymore. 

 

*** 

 

Vattier de Rideaux, the chief of military intelligence for Nilfgaard, listened to the 
imperial reprimand with his head bowed. 


'So that's it,' continued Emhyr var Emreis acidly. 'The department that consumes three 
times as much funding from the state budget as public education, art, and culture put together, 
is not even able to locate a single man. Because apparently the man simply vanished and 
remains hidden, even though I spend incredible sums of money on the department, so that no 
one can hide from it! A man guilty of treason makes a fool of your department, to which I 
have given enough resources and privileges to rob the innocent in their sleep. Believe me, 
Vattier, next time the Council discusses the need to cut the intelligence budget, I will have a 
sympathetic ear. You can trust me on that!' 

'Your Imperial Majesty' – Vattier de Rideaux cleared his throat – 'will no doubt make 
the right decision after careful consideration of all the pros and cons. Both the failures and the 
successes that have been reported. Your Majesty can be sure that the traitor Cahir aep 
Ceallach will not escape his punishment. I've made an effort...' 

'I do not pay you for efforts but for results. And they are moderate, Vattier, moderate! 
What of the matter with Vilgefortz? Where the hell is Cirilla? What are you mumbling? 
Louder!' 

'I think Your Majesty should marry the girl that we keep in Darn Rowan. We need this 
marriage, the legality of the sovereign lordship of Cintra, the calming of the Skellig Islands 
and the insurgents in Attre, Strept, and Northern Mag Turga. We need a general amnesty, 
peace in the hinterlands for the supply lines... We need the neutrality of Kovir's king, Esterad 
Thyssen.' 

'I know. But the girl in Darn Rowan is not the proper girl. I cannot marry her.' 

'Your Imperial Majesty will forgive, but does it matter, whether it is more or less the 
proper girl? The political situation calls for a formal ceremony. And soon. The young lady 
will wear a veil. And when we finally find the real Cirilla, the wedded wife is simply... 
exchanged.' 

'Have you gone mad, Vattier?' 

'We have only shown the imposter briefly. Cintra has not seen the real Cirilla in four 
years, and by the way it sounds, she spent more time on the Skellig Islands than in Cintra 
anyway. I guarantee that nobody will notice the trick.' 

'No!' 

'Your Imperial...' 

'No, Vattier! I want the real Ciri! Now move your ass. Find me Ciri. Find Cahir. And 
Vilgefortz. Because I'm sure wherever Vilgefortz is, Ciri is near.' 

'Your Imperial Majesty...' 

'I'm listening Vattier! I've been listening this whole time!' 


'In the past, I've suspected that the matter with Vilgefortz was an ordinary provocation. 
That the magician was killed or captured, and that Dijkstra's spectacular and noisy hunt for 
him only served to denigrate us and to justify bloody retaliation.' 

'I had this suspicion, as well.' 

'However... it is not public knowledge in Redania, but I know from my agent that 
Dijkstra has discovered one of the hideouts of Vilgefortz, and there is evidence that the 
magician has carried out brutal human experiments. Specifically, experiments on human 
embryos... and pregnant women. So if Vilgefortz had Cirilla in his power, then I fear that the 
continued search for her...' 

'Shut up, damn it!' 

'On the other hand,' Vattier de Rideaux hastily steered the conversation away, obeying 
the unspoken order in the Emperor's angry eyes, 'it could all be disinformation. To discredit 
the magician. That would be like Dijkstra.' 

'You should remove him and find Vilgefortz and Ciri! The devil take you! Do not 
speculate or make assumptions! Where is The Owl? Still in Geso? Does he have to turn over 
every stone and look into each hole? The girl is apparently not there and never was? The 
astrologer either made a mistake or a lied? These are all quotations from his reports. So what 
is he still doing there?' 

'Coroner Skellen, I dare to say, has goals that are not so clear... His department, which 
your Majesty has ordered him to form, has built its base in Fort Rocayne, in Maecht. This 
department, let me add, is a rather suspicious mob. Even more strange, however, is that Mr. 
Skellen hired a famous assassin in late August...' 

'What?' 

'He has hired a bounty hunter and asked him to liquidate a rampant gang in Geso. A 
laudable thing in itself, but is that the task of the Imperial Coroner?' 

'Are you sure that is not envy speaking, Vattier? And that your report is not biased from 
jealousy?' 

'I have noted only facts, Your Majesty.' 

'I want to see facts' – the Emperor said abruptly – 'I'm sick of only hearing about them.' 

 

*** 

 

It had truly been a tough day. Vattier de Rideaux was tired. His daily schedule called for 
an hour or two of paperwork, which should prevent him from drowning in pending 


documents tomorrow, but even the thought of it made him shudder. No, he thought, by the 
gods no. The work will not run away. I will go home... No, not home. The woman can wait. I 
am going to Cantarella. To the sweet Cantarella, where I can relax as well... 

He did not wait long. He simply stood up, took his coat and went outside. When his 
secretary tried to give him a portfolio of saffian leather, filled with urgent documents 
awaiting his signature – he stopped her with a gesture of disgust. Tomorrow! Tomorrow is 
another day! 

He left the palace through the back entrance alongside the gardens and walked along a 
short avenue of cypress trees. He passed the artificial pond in which lived a carp of the 
venerable age of one hundred thirty-two years. Emperor Torres had been prone to it and 
gifted it a golden commemorative medal, which was attached to the gill cover of the giant 
fish. 

'Good evening, Viscount.' 

Vattier flicked his forearm, shaking loose the stiletto hidden in his sleeve. The handle 
slipped into his hands. 

'You are risking a lot, Rience,' he said coldly. 'You're risking a lot to show your scorched 
visage in Nilfgaard. Ahh, it must be a magical teleprojection...' 

'You've noticed? Vilgefortz guaranteed that no one will be able to guess that it is an 
illusion without contact.' 

Vattier put away the stiletto. He had guessed that it was an illusion, but now he knew it. 

'Rience,' he said, 'you're too cowardly to show up here in person. You know what you 
could expect.' 

'The emperor is still prejudiced against me? And against my master Vilgefortz?' 

'Your insolence is disarming.' 

'Hell, Vattier. I assure you that we are still on your side, myself and Vilgefortz. Well, I 
confess we have betrayed you, because we gave you the wrong Cirilla, but that was done in 
good faith, may I be drowned if I lie. After the real one was gone, Vilgefortz figured wrong 
was better than none. We thought you would not care...' 

'Your insolence is not disarming, but insulting. I have no intention to squander my time 
with an offensive illusion. When I finally catch you in your true form, then we will see what 
kind of entertainment you can offer me, and I will make sure that it takes a long time. I 
promise. But until then... Apage, Rience.' 

'I don't know you any more, Vattier. The Vattier I knew, even if the devil had appeared 
before him, wouldn't fail to find out if it could be beneficial to him, accidently or not, before 
he performed the exorcism.' 


Vattier did not acknowledge the illusion by looking at it, but instead watched the algae-
covered carp lazily stir up the mud in the pond. 

'Beneficial?' He finally repeated, and pursed his lips with contempt. 'You? What could 
you give me? Perhaps the real Cirilla? Maybe your boss, Vilgefortz? Perhaps Cahir aep 
Ceallach?' 

'Halt!' The illusion of Rience raised his illusory hand. 'You've got it.' 

'What I have got?' 

'Cahir. We will procure the head of Cahir for you. Myself and my master, Vilgefortz...' 

'Mercy, Rience' snorted Vattier. 'Modify the sequence of names, but still...' 

'As you wish. Vilgefortz – with my humble help – will procure for you the head of Cahir, 
son of Ceallach. We know where he is, we can always pull him out of our sleeve, if desired.' 

'You have opportunities perhaps. Please, are you telling me you have such good agents in 
the army of Queen Meve?' 

'You wish to test me?' Rience grimaced. 'Or do you really not know? Probably the latter. 
Cahir, my dear Viscount, is... We know where he is, we know where he wants to go know, 
and we know in whose company he travels. You want his head? We can get it.' 

'The head' Vattier said smiling, 'which will no longer be able to tell what really happened 
on Thanedd.' 

'That will probably be better,' replied Rience cynically. 'Why give Cahir the opportunity 
to give speeches? Our job is to appease the animosity between Vilgefortz and the emperor, 
not to deepen it. I will procure the silent head of Cahir aep Ceallach. We will regulate it so 
that the merit goes to you and only you. Delivery within three weeks.' 

The age-old carp in the pond fanned the water with its pectoral fins. The carp, thought 
Vattier, must be full of wisdom. But wise in regards to what? Always the same mud and same 
water lilies. 

'Your price Rience?' 

'A trifle. Where is Stefan Skellen and what are his plans?' 

 

*** 

 

'I told him what he wanted to know.' Vattier de Rideaux stretched out on the pillow while 
he played with a golden lock of Carthia van Canten's hair. 'You see, my sweet, certain things 
have to be addressed wisely. And 'wise' means conforming. If one is different, you get 


nothing. Only rotten stinking mud and water in a basin. And what did they expect when the 
basin is made of marble and just a few steps from the palace? Am I right, my sweet?' 

Carthia van Canten, nicknamed Cantarella, did not answer. Vattier did not expect her to. 
The girl was eighteen years old and, generally speaking, not the brightest. Her interests were 
limited to – at least for now – making love, with – at least for now – Vattier. When it came to 
sex Cantarella was a natural talent, her technique and skill were surpassed only by her 
commitment and zeal. But this was not the most important thing about her. 

Cantarella spoke little and rarely, but she was an excellent and willing listener. He could 
speak his mind with her, relax, relax, relax, and mentally and spiritually rebuild himself. 

'In such a profession one expects a reprimand,' Vattier said bitterly 'because I have not 
found Cirilla. However, thanks to my people's work the army achieves success, and that's 
nothing? And that the General Staff knows every move of the enemy, that's nothing? And 
there were a few forts that my agents opened to the imperial troops, rather than having to 
besiege them for weeks to win? But no, there is no praise for it. Cirilla is the only important 
thing!' 

With an angry snort Vattier de Rideaux took a chalice filled with exquisite Est Est 
Toussaint from Cantarella's hands. It was a vintage that recalled the days when the Emperor 
was Emhyr var Emreis the little boy, deprived of his right to the throne and cruelly insulted – 
and Vattier de Rideaux was the young intelligence officer, insignificant in the department's 
hierarchy. 

It had been a good year. For wines. 

Vattier drank a little, played with Cantrella's shapely breasts, and talked. Cantarella 
listened devotedly. 

'Stefan Skellen, my sweet,' murmured the chief of the imperial intelligence 'is a trickster 
and a conspirator. But I knew what he planned even before Rience there... I already have 
someone there... Very close to Skellen... Very close...' 

Cantarella untied the scarf that held her gown together and leaned down. Vattier felt her 
breath and sighed in anticipation of pleasure. A natural talent, he thought. And then the soft, 
hot, and velvety-to-the-touch lips banished every thought from his head. 

Carthia van Canten bestowed her talent to Vattier de Rideaux, chief of the imperial 
intelligence, slowly and skilfully. This was not Carthia's only talent. But Vattier de Rideaux 
had no idea of that. 

He did not know that, despite appearances, Carthia van Canten possessed an excellent 
memory and an intelligence like quicksilver. 

Everything Vattier told her, every scrap of information, every word that he had uttered to 
her during their meeting – Carthia repeated the following morning to the sorceress Assir var 
Anahid. 


 

*** 

 

Yes, I'll bet my head that no one in Nilfgaard even remembered Cahir, not even his 
fiancé, if he had one. 

But more about that later, first we will return to the day and place that we crossed the 
Yaruga. We rode in somewhat of a rush to the east, towards the Black Forest, known as Caed 
Dhu in the Elder Speech. We sought the Druids who would able to predict Ciri's whereabouts 
and may be able to interpret the strange dreams that haunted Geralt. We rode through the 
forests of the upper Riverdell, which the left bank is also called, a wild and almost 
uninhabited region. It is located between the Yaruga and the foothills of Amell Mountains, an 
area called the 'North Case', It is bordered on the east by the valley of Dol Angra and on the 
west by a marshy lake district, whose name escapes me. 

This area has never been claimed by anyone specifically. Therefore, no one has ever 
really known who owned the area and who really ruled over it. The rulers of Temeria, 
Sodden, Cintra and Rivia, in succession, have apparently had something to say on this 
matter. They considered various areas of the left bank as fiefdoms of their crowns, and 
occasionally enforced that notion with fire and iron. But then the Nilfgaardian Armies came 
from behind the Amell Mountains and no one had anything more to say. Nor did any doubts 
remain about the feudal law of the land and property – everything south of the Yaruga 
belonged to the Empire. At the time I am writing this, even many lands to the north of the 
Yaruga belong to the Empire. Though lacking precise information, I do not know how many 
they are or how far they extend to the north. 

Returning to Riverdell, dear reader, allow me a digression on historical developments: 
The story of a given territory's origin and formation is often somewhat random, a side effect 
of conflicts of external forces. The history of a country is very often made by outsiders. 
Foreign affairs are the cause, but the locals – always and without exception – bear the 
effects. 

For Riverdell, this rule applies in full. 

Riverdell was called the river country by its own people. Through the ongoing, year-long 
marches and battles, they had sunk into poverty and had to emigrate. Villages and hamlets 
were burned, and the ruins of homesteads and fallow fields were devoured by the wilderness. 
Trade came to a standstill; the caravans avoided the dilapidated roads and paths. The few 
that remained in the river country were overgrown bullies. They mainly differed from 
wolverines and bears, because they wore pants. At least some of them. And by that I mean: 
Some wore pants, and others did not. They were – mostly – a selfish, boorish, and silly 
people. 

And they had no sense of humour. 


 

*** 

 

The dark-haired daughter of the bee keeper tossed her annoying braid back and continued 
to work on the hand mill with furious energy. Dandelion's efforts fizzled – the poet's words 
seemed to have absolutely no effect on their targeted audience. Dandelion winked at the rest 
of the company and acted as if he sighed and raised his eyes to the ceiling. But he did not. 

'Give it to me,' he repeated, and bared his teeth. 'Let me grind, and you run into the cellar 
and fetch some beer. There must be a keg hidden somewhere in the cellar. Am I right, 
beautiful?' 

'Leave the girl alone, sir,' said the angry wife of the bee keeper – a tall and slender 
woman of surprising beauty, who worked in the kitchen. 'I've already told you there is no 
beer.' 

'You've been told a dozen times, sir,' said the bee keeper, prompting his wife to jump to 
the side and interrupting the conversation the witcher and vampire were having. 'We'll make 
pancakes with honey, and then you can eat. But allow the girl to grind the corn into flour in 
peace, because unless you brought a magician, there can be no pancakes without flour! Let 
her work in peace.' 

'Did you hear that, Dandelion?' cried the witcher. 'Let the girl work in peace and occupy 
yourself with something useful. Or write your memoirs!' 

'I want to drink. I like drink something before eating something. I have a few herbs and 
I'm going to make an infusion. Grandmother, can hot water be found in the hut? I'm asking – 
is there hot water?' 

The old woman on the bench, who was the mother of the bee keeper, looked up from the 
stocking she was stuffing. 'Yes, my dear, it can be found,' she mumbled. 'It's just that it's 
gone cold.' 

Dandelion sighed and resignedly sat down at the table where the company was chatting 
with the bee keeper, who they had met in an early morning encounter in the forest. The bee 
keeper was a thickset, stocky man with black and terribly overgrown hair. It was no wonder 
that he had frightened the company when he suddenly emerged from the brush – they had 
thought he was a lycanthrope. The funniest part was that first one to scream 'A werewolf! A 
werewolf!' was the vampire Regis. There was some confusion, but the matter was quickly 
cleared up and the bee keeper, although wild appearance, proved to be hospitable and 
courteous. The company accepted the invitation to his home without hesitation. The home – 
in the jargon of the bee keeper called an 'estate' – was located in a cleared glade. The bee 
keeper lived there with his mother, wife and daughter. The latter two were women of above 


average and somewhat downright amazing beauty that clearly signified that they were the 
descendants of a Dryad or Hamadryad. 

In the discussions that followed, the bee keeper immediately gave the impression that he 
would only talk about bees, hives, hives on tree tops, drilling hives, smoking out hives, 
honeycomb, wax, and honey. But first impressions turned out to be deceptive. 

'The situation? How should it be? Same like always. You must deliver ever-higher taxes. 
Two pints of honey and an entire wax disc. I slave away to get enough together and sit from 
morning to night on the board, cleaning the hives... To whom do I pay taxes? Well, whoever 
asks for them, how should I know who is currently in power? Lately, it's been to Nilfgaard. 
Because we are now a 'Province of the Empire' or something. And if I sell any honey for 
cash, the emperor takes a cut of it. The Emperor looks prettier than the others, but really the 
situation is just as strict. So...' 

Two dogs, one black and one red-brown, sat down opposite the vampire, lifted their 
heads, and began to howl. The bee keeper's hamadryad wife turned from the stove and 
missed one of them with the broom. 

'A bad omen,' said bee keeper, 'when dogs howl at midday. So... what do you wish to 
speak of?' 

'Of the Druids of Caed Dhu.' 

'Ha! Is that a joke, my noble lords? You really want to go to the Druids? Are you tired of 
living, or what? It's death! The mistletoe cutters capture anyone who dares to enter their 
glades, tie them to a willow trunk, and roast them over a low flame.' 

Geralt threw Regis a glance. Regis winked at him. They both knew very well that the 
rumours that circulated about the Druids were invented. Milva and Dandelion, on the other 
hand, listened with more interest now than before. And with obvious anxiety. 

'Some say,' continued the bee keeper, 'that the mistletoe cutters are exacting vengeance 
against the Nilfgaardians, who started it all by harassing the Druids, namely because they 
marched through Dol Angra and the sacred oak groves and started to attack the Druids 
without reason. Others say that the Druids started it because they captured a few of the 
Imperials and tortured them to death, and now Nilfgaard pays it home to them. In truth, no 
one actually knows. But one thing is certain, if the Druids catch you, they bind you to a 
willow trunk and roast you. To go to them is to go to certain death.' 

'We do not fear them,' said Geralt calmly. 

'Of course.' The bee keeper looked at the witcher, Milva, and Cahir, who had just come 
into the hut after feeding the horses. 'One can see that you're not timid people, you're 
combative and fortified. Ha, those such as you can go peacefully... well... except that your 
efforts and travels have been in vain – the mistletoe cutters are gone from the black trees. 
Nilfgaard has oppressed them, pushed them out of Caed Dhu. They are not there anymore...' 


'Just like that?' 

'Just like that. The mistletoe cutters have left.' 

'Where did they go?' 

The bee keeper threw his Hamadryad wife a look and was silent for a moment. 

'Where?' Repeated the witcher. 

The bee keeper's striped cat sat in front of the vampire and began to meow loudly. The 
Hamadryad wife gave it a smack with her broom. 

'A bad omen when cats meow in the middle of the day,' gasped the bee keeper, strangely 
confused. 'And the Druids... they... have fled to the North Case. Yes. That's right. To the 
North Case.' 

'Some sixty miles south,' estimated Dandelion unconcernedly, almost cheerfully. Under 
the witcher's gaze, however, he quieted immediately. 

In the ensuing silence, the only sound was the evil meowing of the cat as it was chased 
out of the house. 

'Well,' said the vampire, 'what does difference does it make?' 

 

*** 

 

The following morning brought more surprises. And puzzles, however, their solutions 
were very quickly found. 

'The fact strikes me...' said Milva, who was the first to crawl out of the haystack after 
being awakened by voices. 'The fact strikes me that I am always right. Look at this, Geralt.' 

The clearing was filled with people. It obvious at first glance that five or six bee keepers 
had gathered here. The experienced eye of the witcher also spotted a few trappers and at least 
one coal burner in the crowd. All together they were about twenty men, ten women, a dozen 
teenagers of both sexes, and too many children to count. They were equipped with the six 
wagons, twelve oxen, ten cows, four goats and sheep, and an ample amount of all kinds of 
dogs and cats. The amount of barking and meowing taking place under these circumstances 
undoubtedly had to be considered a bad omen. 

'I want to know' – Cahir rubbed his eyes – 'what is this supposed to mean?' 

'Trouble,' observed Dandelion, pulling straw from his hair. Regis was silent, but his 
expression was strange. 


'We invite the noble lords to breakfast,' said the bee keeper when he noticed them. He 
had been accompanied to the haystack by a broad-shouldered man. 'It's ready. Oatmeal with 
milk. And honey... And, allow me to introduce Jan Cronin, our eldest bee keeper...' 

'A pleasure,' lied the witcher, without returning the bow, because his knee hurt like hell. 
'And this crowd, who are they?' 

'Well...' The bee keeper scratched his head. 'You see, winter is coming... The honey is 
already broken and the new hives are drilled... its once again time for us to move to the North 
Case, to the town of Riedbrune... with the honey now supplied, we will spend the winter 
there... But the woods, they are dangerous to travel... alone...' 

The eldest bee keeper cleared his throat. The bee keeper seemed to pull himself together a 
bit and looked at Geralt. 

'You are mounted and armed,' he stammered. 'You look like you are brave and able to 
put up a fight. With you, we can travel anywhere without fear... And you will benefit as 
well... We know every trail, every forest, every floodplain, and every scrub... And we will 
provide you with food...' 

'And the Druids,' Cahir said coldly, 'have moved away from Caed Dhu. And onto the 
North Case. What a strange coincidence.' 

Geralt walked slowly to the bee keeper. He grabbed him with both hands by the front of 
his jacket. But immediately afterward he changed his mind, let go of the jacket, and smoothed 
it. He said nothing. Asked no questions. But still the bee keeper hurried with his explanation. 

'I told the truth! I swear! May I sink into the ground if I was lying! The mistletoe cutters 
are gone from the Caed Dhu! They're not there!' 

'And they are on the North Case, yes?' growled Geralt. 'The same place you and your 
rabble are going? Where you would like to travel with an armed escort? Speak, lad. But 
remember what you said, because you actually might end up in the ground!' 

The bee keeper lowered his eyes and stared nervously at the ground under his feet. Geralt 
eloquently remained silent. Milva, who had finally understood what the witcher had implied, 
cursed indecently. Cahir snorted disapprovingly. 

'And?' urged the witcher. 'Where have the Druids gone?' 

'Well sir, who should know where they are,' the bee keeper finally stammered. 'But they 
might be on the North Case... It's as good a guess as anywhere else. The North Case has so 
many great oaks and the Druids love oak forests...' 

Behind the bee keeper now stood two of elder Cronin's hamadryads, his wife and 
daughter. It was apparent, and fortunate, that the daughter took after her mother and not her 
father. The witcher could not help thinking that the bee keeper compared to his wife like a 


wild boar to a mare. He noticed a few women approaching from behind the hamadryads. 
They were much less beautiful, but all three looked at him pleadingly. 

He threw a glance at Regis, not knowing whether he should laugh or curse. 

The vampire shrugged. 'Ultimately,' he said, 'the bee keeper has the right of it, Geralt. 
All in all, it is probable that the Druids have moved to the North Case. That terrain fits them 
quite well.' 

'This probability' – the witcher's look was very, very cold -'Do you think it is big enough 
to suddenly change direction and strike out at random with this rabble?' 

Regis again shrugged his shoulders. 'What's the difference? Consider: The druids are not 
in Caed Dhu, which eliminates this direction. A return to the Yaruga, I believe, is not up for 
debate. All other directions are therefore equally good choices.' 

'Really?' The temperature of the witcher's voice matched his eyes. 'And from all these 
other directions, which do you consider to be the most appropriate? The direction the bee 
keeper travels in? Or a completely different direction? Can you determine that in your infinite 
wisdom?' 

The vampire turned to the bee keeper, the elders, the hamadryads, and the other women. 
'And what,' he asked earnestly, 'are you so afraid of, good people, that you ask for an escort? 
What do you fear? Say it honestly.' 

'Oh, dear sirs,' sighed Jan Cronin, as all too real horror appeared in his eyes. 'That's the 
real question there... We have to travel through the wet wasteland! And it, dear sir, is 
horrible! There are Drowners, Sawpads, Endregas, Gryffens and other such horrible 
monstrosities! The last time we went in there, two weeks ago, a wood sprite caught my son 
and he only had time to groan before he was gone. Are you surprised that we don't trust 
ourselves to go in there with our women and children? Hmm?' 

The vampire looked at the witcher and made a very serious face. 'In my infinite wisdom,' 
he said, 'I recommend that the most appropriate direction is the direction that is most 
appropriate for a witcher.' 

 

*** 

 

And so we journeyed south to the North Case, a tract of land at the base of the Amell 
Mountains. We went with a large entourage, which had everything: young maidens, bee 
keepers, trappers, women, children, young maidens, pets, household goods, young maidens. 
And large amounts of honey. This honey stuck to everything, even the young maidens. 


The train moved at the pace of oxen and pedestrians. Our marching speed was reduced, 
but not because we had gone astray. Rather, everything went like clockwork – the bee keeper 
knew the routes, the trails and the dikes between the lakes. And this knowledge paid off, oh 
yes. It began to drizzle and suddenly the whole damn river country sank into a fog as thick as 
porridge. Without the bee keeper we would have inevitably gotten lost somewhere deep in the 
swamps. We did not have to waste time or energy for the procurement and preparation of 
food – we had three sufficient meals a day, albeit modest. And after dinner we were allowed 
to lie belly up for a while. 

In short, it was wonderful. Even the witcher, the old grouch and complainer, began to 
smile more often and to enjoy life, because he had calculated that we covered fifteen miles a 
day, a feat we had not accomplished since we had left Brokilon. It had nothing to do the 
witcher though, because although the wet wasteland was so wet that one can hardly imagine 
anything dry, we did not meet any monsters. Well, at night the ghosts howled a bit, the forest-
banshees cried a bit, and pale lights danced on the moors a bit. But nothing sensational. 

We were a little worried, however, that we were back to travelling in a random direction 
and again had no clearly specified target. But how did the vampire Regis put it – 'it is better 
to go forward without a goal, than to have a goal and stay in one place, and it is certainly 
better than to stay in one place without a goal.' 

 

*** 

 

'Dandelion! Strap on your tube more thoroughly! It would be a shame to drop half a 
century of poetry into the ferns.' 

'Do not worry! I won't lose it, you can be sure of that. And I let not let it be taken away! 
Anyone who wants to take this tube away will have to take it from my cold, dead body. May 
I ask Geralt, what is causing your sparkling smile? Wait, let me guess... Congenital idiocy?' 

 

*** 

 

It came to pass that the team of archaeologists from the University of Castell Graupian 
conducted excavations at Beauclair, under an ancient charcoal layer, which indicated a large 
fire. They pressed forward to an even older layer, dating to the 13th Century BC. In this layer 
the remains of walls of mud and mortar formed a sealed cavern, which the scholars excavated 
with great enthusiasm and found two excellently preserved human skeletons: a woman and a 
man. Beside the skeletons they found – in addition to weapons and numerous small artefacts 
– a thirty-inch long tube of solidified leather. The leather had a coat of arms embossed in 
faded colours, though the rhombuses and lions were still visible. The group's head, Professor 


Schliemann, an eminent specialist in the Sigillography of the Dark Ages, identified these as 
the emblems of Rivia, an ancient kingdom, whose location is not known for sure. 

The enthusiasm of archaeologists reached its climax, for manuscripts were kept in such 
tubes in the dark ages, and the weight of the container led them to believe that there were 
plenty of papers and parchments inside. The extremely well preserved condition of the tube 
gave hope to the idea that the documents would be legible and shed light on the darkness 
vanished in the past. The century would speak! It was an incredible stroke of luck, a victory 
of science, that could not be wasted. As a precautionary measure a linguist and researcher of 
dead languages had been summoned from Castell Graupian, as well as professionals who 
would be capable of opening the tube without the slightest risk of damaging the precious 
contents. 

Meanwhile, rumours of a 'treasure' circulated among Professor Schliemann's employees. 
As chance would have it, these words came to the ears of three individuals who had 
previously been grave robbers, but were now employed by the excavation to work in the clay. 
They were known by the names: Grabsch, Zapp, and Kamil Ronstetter. Convinced that the 
tube was literally filled with gold and jewels, the three hired excavators stole the priceless 
artefact in the middle of the night and fled into the forest. There they kindled a very small fire 
and sat around it. 

'What are you waiting for?' Zapp said to Grabsch. 'Open the tube!' 

'I would, but it won't budge,' complained Grabsch at Zapp. 'it's clamped as ratshit!' 

'Then give it a kick with your boots, you fucking rat!' Kamil Ronstetter recommended. 

Grabsch was speechless after he opened the priceless discovery and the contents fell onto 
the ground. 

'Ratshit!' cried out Zapp in surprise. 'What's that?' 

The question was stupid, because it was obvious at first glance that it was sheets of paper. 
Therefore was Grabsch gave no answer, but took one of the sheets in his hand and held it in 
front of his nose. For a long moment he stared at the strange-looking characters. 

'Written all over,' he finally explained professionally. 'These are letters!' 

'Letters?' cried Ronstetter Kamil, pale with horror. 'Written letters? Oh ratshit!' 

'It describes magic!' Zapp gasped in horror and his teeth rattled. 'Letters means witch 
stuff! Don't touch the ratshit! Because you can get infected!' 

Grabsch didn't have to be told twice; he threw the tube into the fire and wiped his hands 
on his trousers with jerky movements. Kamil Ronstetter kicked the other papers into the fire – 
after all, some children could have stumbled on the dirty stuff. Then all three hurriedly left 
the dangerous place. The priceless relic of the Dark Age was burning with a bright, high 


flame. For a few moments the centuries spoke in the crackling fire and the blackening paper. 
Then the flame was extinguished, and darkness as black as ratshit covered the earth. 

 

*** 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


Houvenaghel, Dominik Bombastus (1239 – 1301) – Became rich in the province of 
Ebbing by conducting large-scale enterprises; set up business in Nilfgaard. Already 
respected by previous emperors, he was elevated to the rank of viscount and Salz Graf of 
Venendal by Emperor Jan Calveit; as reward for services rendered, the office of mayor was 
awarded. 

 

Faithful counsellor to the Emperor, Houvenaghel benefitted from his full confidence and 
took part in many public affairs. In Ebbing, he indulged in many charity ventures, spending 
considerable sums of money to support the needy and the poor and to build orphanages, 
hospitals and nursery facilities. A great lover of fine art and sports, he donated a theatre and 
a stadium to the capital city, both of which bore his name. He was a model of propriety, 
honesty and respectability in mercantile circles. 

 

Effenberg and Talbot 

Encyclopaedia Maxima Mundi, vol VII 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


