Chapter One 

It was well known that the Universe, as well as life, revolves in a circle. On the rim of this 
circle, in pairs exactly opposite each other are eight magic points, which give a full rotation, 
the annual cycle. These points, lying along the rim of the circle in pairs opposite each other, 
are: Imbaelk that is, Germination, Lammas that is, Maturity, Belleteyn, that is Blossoming, 
Saovine that is, Withering. The rim of the circle is also marked by two solstices – winter or 
Midinvaerne and summer or Midaete. There are also two equinoxes – spring or Birke and 
autumn or Velen. These dates divide the circle into eight parts – and so the elven calendar 
year is divided. 

When Humans landed in the estuary of the Yaruga and the delta of the Pontar, they 
brought with them their own lunar calendar, dividing the year into twelve months – which 
cover the full annual cycle of work in the fields – from the beginning of January until the end 
– in which frost turned the earth into a hard lump. But although humans divided the year and 
counted the date differently, they accepted the elven circle and the eight points: Imbaelk, 
Lammas, Belleteyn, Saovine and both solstices and equinoxes and among the humans they 
became important holidays. Distinguishing themselves among other dates as much as a 
solitary tree standing out in a meadow. 

These dates differ from others by magic. 

It was no secret that during these eight dates and nights magical auras intensify 
dramatically. Nobody is surprised by these magical phenomena and enigmatic events that 
accompany these eight dates, especially the equinoxes and solstices. Everyone had become 
accustomed to these phenomena and they seldom gave rise to great sensation. 

This year was different. 

This year, as humans usually celebrate the autumn equinox festival dinner, during which 
the table had the largest possible number of fruits from the harvest that year, but no more than 
a little of each of them. So custom commanded. Once they had prepared the dinner and had 
thanked the goddess Melitele for the year's harvest, the humans settled down to rest. And 
then the horror began. 

 Shortly before midnight a terrible storm broke, the wind blew hellishly, in which could 
be heard the crackling of broken branches, roof timbers creaking and shutters banging and the 
sound of ghostly howls, screams and wailing. Even the clouds took on fantastic shapes, 
among which the most frequently repeated were silhouettes of galloping horses and unicorns. 
The wind suddenly stopped after about an hour. But silence did not occur, because the night 
suddenly came alive with the chirping and fluttering of hundreds of nightjars, these 
mysterious birds, according to popular belief flock to the houses of the dying and sing their 


mournful song. This night, the chorus of the nightjars was so massive and loud that it seemed 
as if the whole world were to die. 

The nightjars warbled there wild song for the dead while on the horizon the clouds had 
extinguished the remains of the moonlight. Then all of a sudden the dreadful howling of a 
Banshee was heard, harbinger of sudden and violent death, and through the sky rode the Wild 
Hunt, a procession of ghosts with flaming eyes riding on the backs of skeletal horses, their 
tattered clothes waving around them like banners. From time to time, the Wild Hunt made its 
harvest, but it had not been for decades so terrible. In Novigrad it was counted more than 
twenty people had disappeared without a trace. 

When the Hunt and the clouds had dispersed, human eyes where once again able to see 
the moon, as usual at the time of the equinox, it was waning. But this night it was the colour 
of blood. 

Ordinary people had many explanations for the equinoxial phenomena, which differed 
significantly according to regional demonology. Astrologers, druid and wizards also had their 
explanations, but were mostly wrong and exaggerated. Few, very few people were able to 
associate these phenomena with actual facts. For example, on the Skellige Islands, a few 
superstitious people saw in those events the prophecies of Tedd Deireadh, the end of the 
world, which is proceeded by the battle of Ragh nar Roog, the final struggle between the 
forces of Light and Darkness. The superstitious believed that the violent storm on the night of 
the autumn equinox and the waves that shook the islands with a wave was driven by the 
monstrous bow of Naglfar from Morhogg, leading an army of ghosts and demons in a ship 
built from the finger and toe-nails of the dead. Wiser and better informed people however 
associated the fury of the elements with the infamous sorceress Yennefer and her terrible 
death. And still other – even better informed, saw a sign in the stormy sea that someone was 
dying, in whose veins ran the blood of the Rulers of Skellige and Cintra. 

Since the world began, the night of the autumn equinox has also been a night of ghosts, 
nightmare and apparitions, sudden awakening in the night, with breath and heartbeat caught 
in fear, between sheets, twisted and wet with perspiration. The apparitions and awakenings 
did not even spare the clearest of heads, in Nilfgaard, in the Towers of Gold, the emperor 
himself, Emhyr var Emreis, woke up screaming. Far to the north in Lan Exeter, King Esterad 
Thyssen jumped out of bed, waking his wife, Queen Zuleyka. In Tretogor, Dijkstra woke up 
and reached for his knife, waking the Minister of Treasuries wife. In the palace of 
Montecalvo, Philippa Eilhart jumped up from damask bed linens, without waking the wife of 
Count de Noailles. They awoke – more or less sharply – the dwarf, Yarpen Zigrin in 
Mahakam, the old witcher Vesemir in the mountain fortress of Kaer Morhen, the trainee 
banker, Fabio Sachs in the city of Gors Velen and Crach an Craite on board the ship 
'Ringhorn'. It awoke the witch Fringilla Vigo at the castle of Beauclair, the priestess 
Sigrdrifa in the temple of the goddess Freya located on the island of Hindarsfjall. It awoke 
Daniel Etcheverry, Earl of Garramone, at the besieged fortress of Maribor, Lance-corporal 
Zyvik of the Dun Banner, at the fort of Ban Glean. Businessman Dominik Bombastus 
Houvenaghel in the town of Claremont, and many others. 


Few were able to connect these phenomena with actual events. And with a specific 
person. As luck would have it, three of these people spent the night of the autumn equinox 
under one roof. In the temple of the Goddess Melitele in Ellander. 

 

*** 

 

'Nightjars...' moaned the scribe Jarre, while watching the darkness that flooded the park 
in the sanctuary. 'I think there are thousands of them, a whole flock... They scream for the 
death of someone... For the death of her... She is dying...' 

'Do not talk nonsense,' Triss Merigold, turned abruptly, raised her clenched fist a looked 
for a moment like she was going to push the boy or hit him in the chest. 'Do you believe in 
stupid superstitions? September is finished, the birds are gathering to migrate. It is totally 
natural!' 

'She is dying...' 

'Nobody is dying!' cried the enchantress, pale with rage. 'Nobody, do you understand? 
Stop babbling!' 

In the library hall, novices were awakened by the natural alarm. Their faces were grave 
and pale. 

'Jarre,' Triss calmed down, she put her hand on the boy's shoulder and squeezed. 'You're 
the only man in the temple. All are looking to you, looking to you for help. You must not be 
afraid, do not panic. Control yourself. Do not disappoint us.' 

Jarre sighed and with a visible effort tried to suppress the shaking of his hands and lips. 

'I'm not afraid...' he whispered, avoiding the eyes of the enchantress. 'It is not fear, just 
concern. For her. I saw her in a dream...' 

'I saw her too,' Triss pursed her lips, 'we had the same dream, you, me and Nenneke. But 
not a word about it.' 

'The blood on her face... So much blood...' 

'I have asked you to be quiet. Nenneke is coming.' 

The high priestess approached them. Her face was tired. At Triss' silent question, she 
shook her head. Noticing Jarre opening his mouth, she hastened to speak. 

'Unfortunately, nothing. When the Wild Hunt passed over the sanctuary, it awakened 
almost everyone, but none have had visions. Even as vague as ours. Go to sleep, boy, there is 
nothing here for you to do. Girls, go back to the dormitory!' 


She rubbed her face with both hands. 

'Heh... Equinox! Cursed night... Go to sleep, Triss. We cannot do anything.' 

'This helplessness drives me crazy,' the enchantress said, clenching her fists. 'Just 
thinking that she is suffering, bleeding, that she is threatened... The devil, if I know what to 
do!' 

Nenneke, the high priestess of the temple of Melitele, turned. 

'And you have tried to pray?' 

 

*** 

 

In the south, far beyond the mountains of Amell, in Ebbing, in the country called 
Pereplut, in the extensive swamps formed by the intersection of the rivers Velda, Lete and 
Arete, a place about eight hundred miles as the crow flies from the city of Ellander and the 
temple of Melitele, as dawn, a nightmare abruptly woke an old hermit named Vysogota. Once 
awake, Vysogota could not remember any of the content of the dream, but a strange 
uneasiness kept him from falling back to sleep. 

 

*** 

 

'Cold, cold, cold, brrr,' Vysogota said to himself as he walked along a path through the 
bushes. 'Cold, cold, cold, brrr.' 

The next trap was empty. Not a muskrat. A whole day of hunting with no luck. Vysogota 
cleaned the mud and the algae covering the trap, muttering curses and sniffing his nose. 

'Huh, it is winter' he said, walking towards the swamp. 'And it is not even the end of 
September. After all, we are barely four days after the equinox. Such cold at this time I 
cannot remember in my whole life. And I have been alive a long time!' 

The next trap, the last one, was also empty. Vysogota had no desire to even curse. 

'There is no doubt,' mused the old man, 'that year after year the climate is slowly 
cooling. And now it seems the cooling effect is accelerating like an avalanche. Ha, the elves 
had foreseen this a long time ago, but who believes in the predictions of the elves?' 

Above the old man's head, fluttered wings, and dark silhouettes began to dart. The fog 
over the marshes rang with the sudden wild shriek of nightjars, and with the rapid flapping of 
their wings. Vysogota paid no attention to the birds. He was not superstitious and there had 


always been many nightjars in the swamp, especially at dawn when they flew so close it was 
a wonder they didn't collide with his head. Well, they may not have as many as they have this 
day and not always with this dismal screaming... However, in recent times it was the nature 
for outrageous antics and strange phenomena which followed one another, each more bizarre 
than the last. 

He was pulling the last snare from the water, also empty, when he heard the neighing of a 
horse. The nightjars singing stopped as if on command. 

Even on the moor, Pereplut had dry thickets located in higher places, ridges covered with 
black birch, alders, cornejo, dogwood and blackthorn. Most of the groves were surrounded by 
bogs so that it was completely impossible for any horse or rider who did not know the way to 
reach them. And yet the neighing – Vysogota heard again – came precisely from one of these 
groves. 

Curiosity overcame caution. 

Vysogota did not know much about horses and their breeds, but it was an aesthetician and 
knew how to recognise and appreciate beauty. And the horse's hair glistened like anthracite, 
silhouetted against the trunks of birches was extraordinarily beautiful. It was the quintessence 
of true beauty. It was so beautiful it seemed unreal. 

But it was real. And it was real in the way it was trapped, entangled with the halter straps 
and red blood embrace of the branches of a cornejo. 

When Vysogota came closer, the horse pricked up its ears, gracefully shook its head, 
turned and stamped until the earth trembled. Now he could see that the animal was a trapped 
mare. The old man saw something else. Something that caused his heart to run away beating 
and invisible fingers to squeeze his throat. 

Behind the horse, in a shallow ditch, lay a corpse. 

Vysogota threw his bag on the floor. He was ashamed by that his first thought had been to 
turn around and run away. He approached with caution, because the black mare stamped the 
floor and chewed her bit and was apparently only waiting an opportunity to bite or kick a 
stranger. 

The corpse was a dead teenage boy. He lay face down on the ground, one arm crushed 
against the side of his body, the other outstretched to the side with fingers dug into the 
ground. The boy was wearing a suede jacket, tight leather pants and elven boots with buckles 
that reached to the knees. 

Vysogota bent down and at that moment the corpse groaned loudly. The gray mare 
whinnied sharply and stomped the earth with her hooves. 

The hermit knelt down and carefully turned the wounded boy over. Instinctively he drew 
back his head and hissed at the sight of the monstrous mask of dirt and dried blood on the 
boy's face. Gently he wiped away the moss, leaves and sand on his lips covered with snot and 


drool, and tried to remove a tangle of hair stuck to his cheek with blood. The wounded boy 
groaned dully, tensed and then began to tremble. Vysogota removed the hair from his face. 

'A girl,' he said loudly, unable to believe what was right in front of him. 'It is a girl.' 

 

*** 

 

If the day after at nightfall someone had crept up to the hut deep in the swamp and looked 
through the cracks in the shutters, in the flickering light of an oil lamp they would have seen 
a slender body with its head wrapped in bandages, lying motionless, almost dead, covered 
with a fur blanket. They would have also seen an old man sitting with a long white beard and 
white hair falling from the edges of his bald head down to his shoulders. They would have 
seen the old man silhouetted against a lit candle, how on the table there was an hourglass, 
how he sharpened his pen, as he leaned over a sheet of parchment. How he intently watched 
the wounded girl and spoke to himself. 

But nothing like that could happen, nobody could see. The hut with a roof covered with 
moss was lost in the mists, abandoned in the middle of the marshes, where no one dared to 
tread. 

 

*** 

 

'I record the following,' Vysogota dipped his pen into the ink. 'It is passed the third hour 
after the operation. Diagnosis – vulnus incisivum, a laceration inflicted with considerable 
force by an unknown object, probably a curved blade. The wound begins under the eye 
socket on the left cheek and runs through the temporal region towards the ear. The deepest 
part of the wound, which reaches the periosteum, starts under the eye socket. The estimated 
time that has passed since the wounds were inflicted until the time of the first treatment, ten 
hours.' 

The pen squeaked on the parchment, but the squeaking did not last for more than a few 
moments. For only a few lines. Vysogota obviously did not consider everything he was 
saying to himself, as worthy of being written down. 

'Returning to the treatment of the wounds,' the old man continued fixing his eyes on the 
pulsating and crackling flame of the tallow candle, 'I write the follow. I did not cut along the 
edges of the injury, I limited myself to only removing a few tears that were not bleeding and 
clotting, of course. I cleaned the wound with an extract of willow bark. I removed the dirt and 
foreign bodies. Then stitched it, with hemp thread. Other types of string are not available to 
me. Finally I put on a poultice of mountain arnica and gauze bandages.' 


A mouse scampered though the middle of the room. Vysogota threw it a piece of bread. 
The girl on the pallet breathed raggedly and moaned in her sleep. 

 

*** 

 

'It is eight hours after the procedure. The state of the patient – no change. The state of the 
doctor... in other words, mine, is improved, since I repaired it with a bit of sleep... I can 
continue with the notes. It is therefore be appropriate to transcribe in these pages some 
information about my patient. For future generations. In case some future generations are 
able to get to these wetlands before this becomes rot and discarded ashes.' 

Vysogota sighed heavily, dipped the pen and cleaned it on the edge of the fountain. 

'As for the patient,' he murmured, 'let it be recorded as follows. She appeared to be about 
sixteen years of age, tall, her formation is rather thin, but at least it is not weak, showing no 
signs of malnutrition. Muscle and physique are rather typical of a young elf, but I have not 
noticed any other characteristics of mixing... even quadroon inclusive. A lower percent of 
elven blood, as is known, can leave no trace.' 

Only then did Vysogota realise that he had not written on the page, not one rune, not a 
single word. He supported the pen on the paper, but the ink had dried. The old man paid no 
attention. 

'Let it be recorded also,' he continued, 'that she has never given birth. Also on the body 
there are no old signs left after accidents or injuries, no scars or traces of those who are put to 
hard work or a risky life. I emphasize the I speak of old signs. There are no shortage of recent 
signs throughout the body. The girl has been beaten. A real beating and not at the hands of 
her father. Probably kicked her too.' 

'I also found on the body a rather strange sign... Humm, this is written for the sake of 
science... In the groin, near the pubic mound, she had a tattoo of a red rose.' 

Vysogota contemplated the sharp tip of the pen, after which he dipped it into the ink. This 
time however, he did not forget the purpose for which he had done this – he began to cover 
the paper with regular lines of sloped writing. He continued writing until the pen dried up. 

'Half conscious,' he continued, 'she shouted and talked. Her accent and manner of 
expression, if we discount the constant expressions interspersed with the obscene slang of 
criminals, cause considerable confusion, and was difficult to locate, but I venture to say that 
she came from the north instead of the south. Some of the words...' 

Again the pen squeaked. Briefly, far less than was needed to write down everything he 
had said a moment ago. After which he continued his monologue, exactly where he was 
interrupted. 


'Some words, name and nicknames that she spoke in her fever, would be better not to 
write. It is worth being investigated. All the indications are that a very, very unusual person 
has made their way to the hut of old Vysogota...' 

He was silent for a while, listening. 

'I hope,' he muttered, 'that old Vysogota's hut does not become the end of her road.' 

 

*** 

 

Vysogota bent over the parchment and even leaned on the pen, but he wrote nothing, not 
a single rune. He threw the pen on the table. He gasped for a moment, muttering angrily and 
snorted. He looked at the bed and listened to the sound which came from there. 

'I have to admit,' he said in a tired voice, 'that my fears are in place. All my efforts may 
be inadequate and ineffective. My patient is doing very poorly and has a high fever. The 
wound is infected. We have experience three of the four cardinal symptoms of acute 
inflammation. Redness, heat and a tumour are easy to notice at this time to the eye and touch. 
When the post-operative shock has passed, there will be no doubt be the four symptom – 
Pain. Let it be written that it has been almost half a century since I devoted myself to the 
practice of medicine, I see how the years weigh on my memory and the agility of my fingers. 
I cannot do much, there is even less I can do. I do not have enough remedies or medications. 
All my hope lies in the defence mechanisms of a young body...' 

 

*** 

 

'Twelve hours after the procedure. As expected, there has appeared the fourth main 
symptom of inflammation – pain. The patient screams with pain, fever and her tremors have 
increased. I have nothing, no drugs I can give her. I have a small amount of elixir of 
stamonium, but she is too weak to survive its action. I also have some monkshood, but it 
would kill her instantly.' 

 

*** 

 

'Fifteen hours after the procedure. It is dawn. The patient is unconscious. The fever is still 
rising and the tremors are increasing. Beyond this, there appears to be a sharp contraction of 


the muscles of the face. If it is tetanus, the girl is lost. But let us hope it is only a facial 
nerve... Or the trigeminal never... Or both. She will be disfigured... But alive...' 

Vysogota looked at the parchment, he had not written a rune or a word. 

'Provided,' he said dully, 'she survives the infection.' 

 

*** 

 

'Twenty hours after the procedure. The fever is still rising. The patient's status is critical. 
Redness, heat, tumour and pain, it seems to me, have not yet reached their peak. But she has 
no chance of even living to reach those boundaries. So I write... I, Vysogota of Corvo do not 
believe in the existence of the gods. But if by chance there are, please take into your 
protection, this girl. And forgive me for what I did... If what I did turned out to be in error.' 

Vysogota dropped his pen, rubbed his eyes, which were swollen and itchy and rested his 
hands on his temples. 

'I have given her a mixture of monkshood and stramonium,' he said in a low voice. 'The 
next few hours will decide everything.' 

 

*** 

 

He was not asleep, only dozing when he was awaked by a cry. More a cry of anger than 
pain. Outside, the dawn's dim light shone through cracks in the shutters. The sand in the 
hourglass had stopped falling long ago. Vysogota, as usual, forgot to turn it around. The wick 
of the candle was extinguished, only the ruby glow of the fireplace poorly lit the corner of the 
room. The old man stood up and pushed aside the curtain separating the bed from the rest of 
the room to give some reassurance to the patient. 

The patient was getting off the floor on which she had fallen on a moment before and was 
sitting on the edge of the bed, trying to scratch her face under the bandage. Vysogota 
coughed. 

'I'll ask you not to get up. You are weak. If you want something, call me. I'm always 
near.' 

'Well, I do not want you to be near,' she said softly, but very clear. 'I want to piss.' 

When he returned to collect the chamber pot, she lay on the bed, on her back, massaging 
the bandage covering her cheek and was pressed to her forehead and neck with tape. When he 
returned after a while, he found her in the same position. 


'Four days?' she asked, staring at the ceiling. 

'Five. It has been almost a day since we last spoke. You've slept the entire day. That is 
good. You need to sleep.' 

'I feel better.' 

'I'm glad to hear that. Let's remove the bandage. Grab my hand, I will help you sit.' 

 The wound had healed well; it was dry and was no longer painful when he peeled the 
bandage off. She gently touched her cheek and winced. Vysogota knew that it was not from 
pain. On each occasion anew she ensured the extent of her injury, aware of the seriousness of 
the wound. To ensure – with horror – that what she felt touch previously, was not a fever 
induced nightmare. 

'Do you have a mirror?' 

'No,' he lied. 

She looked at him, perhaps for the first time fully conscious. 

'Does that mean it is terrible?' she asked, passing her fingers gently over the stitches. 

'It is... It is a long, deep wound,' he stammered, annoyed with himself for explaining and 
justifying himself to a brat. 'Your face is still very swollen. In a few days, I will remove the 
stitches, until then I will put willow bark extract on it. You no longer need to have your 
whole head bound up. The wound heals very well.' 

She did not answer. She moved her mouth and jaw, twisting her face, trying to see what 
her injuries would allow her to do and what not to do. 

'I've made chicken soup. Eat.' 

'I'll eat. But this time by myself. I do not want to have to be fed like a cripple.' 

She ate for a long time. The wooden spoon was lifted to her mouth gently and with such 
effort, as if it weighted at least two pounds. But she did it without Vysogota's help, who 
watched with interest. Vysogota was curious – and the curiosity was burning. He knew that 
with the girl's return to health would begin the exchange of words that might shed some light 
on how she mysteriously appeared on the moors. He knew it and could not wait until then. He 
had spent too much time living alone in the wilderness. 

She finished eating and lay down on the cushions. For a while she looked at the ceiling as 
if dead then turned her head. Her extraordinary green eyes, Vysogota thought again, gives 
her face a look of childlike innocence, which at the moment shows through her horribly 
maimed cheek. Vysogota knew this kind of beauty – the large eyes of an eternal child, was an 
appearance that produced in instinctive sympathy. A girl eternal, even when she is twenty, 
even after her thirtieth birthday had fallen into oblivion. Yes, Vysogota knew this kind of 
beauty. His second wife was the same. His daughter also. 


'I have to leave here,' the girl said suddenly. 'And fast. I'm being pursued. You know 
that.' 

'I know,' he nodded. 'These were the first words you said that despite appearances were 
not delusions. More precisely, one of the first. First you asked about your horse and your 
sword. In that order. When I assured you that your horse and sword were taken care of, you 
came to suspect that I was not an ally of Bonhart and that I was there to heal you, not to 
subject you to torture and give you false hope. When, not without difficulty, you realised 
your mistake, you introduced yourself as Flaks and thanked me for rescuing you.' 

'That's good,' she stared at the cushions, as if to avoid eye contact. 'It is good that I 
remembered to thank you. I remember it like in a fog. I did not know what was true and what 
was a dream. It bothered me that I had not thanked you. But, my name is not Falka.' 

'I also know this, but more by chance. You said it during your fever.' 

'I am a fugitive,' she said without turning her head. 'A fugitive. It is dangerous to give me 
shelter. It is dangerous to know my real name. I have to get on my horse and leave before I 
am discovered...' 

'A while ago,' he said mildly, 'you had trouble sitting on the chamber pot. I cannot 
imagine how you could sit a horse. But I assure you it is safe here. No one will find you here 
with me.' 

'They are searching for me. They follow my tracks, searching the surroundings...' 

'Calm down. Day after day it has been raining and the rain has washed away all tracks. 
And the area is deserted. You're in the home of a hermit who has isolated himself from the 
world. So it is too hard for the world to find him. However, if you wish, I can find a way to 
bring you news of your relatives and friends.' 

'You do not even know how I am...' 

'You are a wounded girl,' he interrupted, 'fleeing from someone who does not hesitate to 
hurt girls. Do you want me to send a message to someone?' 

'There is no one,' she said after a moment, Vysogota caught the change in her voice. 'My 
friends are dead. They were all killed.' 

He asked no questions. 

'I am death,' she continued in a strange voice. 'Everyone who comes into contact with 
me, dies.' 

'Not everyone,' he denied firmly. 'Not Bonhart. The one whose name you screamed out 
in your dreams, that you now want to escape. Your meeting has done more harm to you than 
to him. Was it he... who wounded your face?' 


'No,' she pressed her lips together to stifle something that could be a moan or a curse. 
'Kalous was the one who wounded my face. Stefan Skellen. And Bonhart... Bonhart 
wounded me much deeper. More deeply. Did I talk about it in the fever?' 

'Relax. You're weak, you should avoid sudden movements.' 

'My name is Ciri. ' 

'I will prepare a compress of monkshood, Ciri.' 

'Wait... Could you give me a mirror?' 

'I told you...' 

'Please!' 

He obeyed, he came to the conclusion that it was necessary and it could not wait any 
longer. He even brought over a candle. So she could see better what had been done to her 
face. 

'Well, yes,' she said in a broken voice. 'Yes it is as I imagined it. Almost like I imagined 
it.' 

He departed and pulled the curtain of blankets closed behind him. 

She tried to weep quietly, so he could not hear. She tried with all her might. 

 

*** 

 

The next day Vysogota pulled out half the stitches. Ciri rubbed her cheek, hissing like a 
snake, complaining of severe pain in her ear and hypersensitivity in her neck under her jaw. 
Still, she got up, dressed and went outside. Vysogota did not protest, but accompanied her. 
He did not need to help or hold her up. The girl was healthy and was much stronger than she 
seemed. 

Outside, however, she stumbled. She leaned against the door frame. 

'It is...' she exhaled sharply, 'it is cold! It's nearly freezing. It is winter already? How 
long have I been in bed? Weeks?' 

'Exactly six days. Today is the fifth day of October. But it seems this October will be 
unusually cold.' 

'The fifth of October?' she frowned, and then hissed with pain. 'How can it be? Two 
weeks?' 

'What? What is two weeks?' 


'It does not matter.' She shrugged her shoulders. 'Maybe I'm wrong... Or maybe not. 
Tell me what stinks here so much?' 

'Skins. Muskrat, beaver, mink, otter and other tanning skins. Even a hermit has to make a 
living.' 

'Where is my horse?' 

'In the pen. ' 

The black mare greeted them with a loud snort and Vysogota's goat echoed with a bleat, 
which echoed his great displeasure of having to share his accommodation with another 
tenant. Ciri embraced the horse's neck and patted him, stroking his mane. 

'Where is my saddle and saddle bags?' 

'Here.' 

He did not protest, make any comment or express any opinion. He was silent, leaning on 
his cane. He did not move when she gasped while trying to raise her saddle, did not flinch 
when she staggered under the weight and fell awkwardly on the floor covered with straw and 
released a loud moan. He did not approached her or help her up. He watched carefully. 

'Well,' Ciri said through clenched teeth, while pushing the mare who was trying to stick 
his nose through the neck of her shirt. 'It's clear. But I have to leave here, dammit! I have to 
go!' 

'Where?' he asked dryly. 

She massaged her face with her hands while sitting on the straw beside the saddle. 

'As far away as possible.' 

Vysogota nodded, as if the answer satisfied him, clarified everything and left no doubt. 
Ciri rose with effort. She did not even attempt to pick up the saddle and harness. She check to 
see if the mare had hay and oats in the pen then began to rub his back and sides with straw. 
Vysogota waited in silence and lived to see. The girl stumbled onto the pole supporting the 
roof and turned white as a sheet. Without a word he gave her his cane. 

'Nothing's wrong. I'm just...' 

'Just dizzy, because you are sick and weak as a newborn. Let's go back. You have to lie 
down.' 

 

*** 

 


About sunset, having previously slept for a few hours, Ciri came outside again. Vysogota, 
who had just returned from the river, met her at the hedge of hazel bushes. 

'Do not go far from the hut,' he warned. 'Firstly, you're too weak...' 

'I feel better.' 

'Secondly, it is dangerous. All around are bottomless swamps and endless forests of 
reeds. You do not know the trails; you could get lost and drown in the marsh.' 

'But,' she said pointing at the bag he carried on his shoulder, 'you know the trails and of 
course you travel them whenever you want. It seems to me that the swamps are not so 
dangerous. You tan hides for a living that is clear. Kelpie, my mare had oats and I do not see 
a field around here in sight. We eat chicken and barley porridge. And bread, real bread, not 
cakes. I do not think that you trapped it. So that means there is a village around here.' 

'A faultless deduction,' he admitted quietly. 'That means I have received rations from the 
nearest settlement. The nearest, but it does not mean that it is close. It lies on the edge of the 
marsh. The marsh borders a river. I exchange my furs for food which they bring me in a boat. 
Bread, flour, salt, cheese and sometimes chicken or rabbit. Occasionally news.' 

There were no questions, so he continued. 

'Horsemen have arrived in the village. Twice. The first time they threatened the peasants 
with fire and sword, if anyone helped you or hid you. The second time, they promised a 
reward for finding your corpse. Your pursuers think that you've succumbed to your injuries 
and are lying out here dead somewhere in the forest of fallen trees or brushwood.' 

'And they will not rest until they find my dead body,' she muttered darkly. 'I know this 
well. They must have proof that I am dead. Without this proof they will not give up. They 
will search everywhere. And eventually they will come here...' 

'They are very interested in you,' he said. 'Even I would say they are interested in an 
extraordinary way...' 

She pursed her lips. 

'Do not be afraid. I will go before they find me. I will not expose you to danger... Do not 
be afraid.' 

'Why do you assume that I'm afraid?' he shrugged his shoulders. 'What reason is there to 
be scared? Nobody comes here and nobody will be able to find you here. But if you poke 
your snout out of the reeds, you will come face to face with your pursuers.' 

'In other words,' she threw back her head in a gesture of defiance. 'I have to stay here. Is 
that what you meant?' 

'You're not a prisoner. You can leave whenever you like. Rather, whenever you are able. 
But you can also stay here and wait. The time will come when your pursuers will get 


discouraged. They always get discouraged, sooner or later. Always. You can believe me. I 
know this.' 

Her green eyes sparkled when she looked at him. 

'At the end of the day,' the hermit said quickly, while shrugging his shoulders and 
avoiding her gaze, 'do what you want. I repeat, I will not keep you here.' 

'For now I will not go,' she snorted. 'I feel weak... And the sun is setting... And I do not 
know the trails. So let's get back to the hut. I'm freezing.' 

 

*** 

 

'You said I've been here for six days. Is that true?' 

'Why would I lie?' 

'Don't fret. I'm trying to calculate the days... I escaped... I was hurt... The day of the 
equinox. The twenty third of September. If you want to count according to the elves, the last 
day of Lammas.' 

'It is not possible.' 

'Why would I lie?' She cried and moaned while touching her face. Vysogota looked on 
calmly. 

'I do not know,' he replied calmly. 'But I used to be a doctor, Ciri. It has been a long 
time, but I can still distinguish a wound inflicted in a few hours to a wound that has been 
untreated for four days. I found you on September twenty seventh, thus you were wounded 
on the twenty sixth. The third day of Velen, if you prefer to count as the elves do. Three days 
after the equinox.' 

'I was wounded the day of the equinox.' 

'It is not possible, Ciri. You must have mistaken the date.' 

'Absolutely not. You are probably using an out-dated calendar, hermit.' 

'As you wish. Is it so important?' 

'No. Not at all.' 

 

*** 

 


Three days later, Vysogota took out the last of the stitches. He had every reason to be 
please and proud of his work – the stitching was straight and clean, there was no fear of dirt 
being tucked in the wound. The surgeon's satisfaction was only marred by watching Ciri star 
at the scar in gloomy silence, trying different angles with a mirror and trying to hide it, 
without success, by throwing her hair over her cheek. The scar had disfigured here. A fact is a 
fact. There was nothing she could do. Nothing could help her pretend that it was not there. 
Still red and swollen like a rope, dotted with the traces of the sting of the needle and marked 
with the signs of the thread, the scar looked truly macabre. It was possible that the condition 
might show a slow or rapid improvement. However, Vysogota knew there was no possibility 
that the scar would disappear or cease to disfigure her. 

Ciri was feeling much better, to Vysogota's amazement and satisfaction and no longer 
spoke of leaving. He took the black mare, Kelpie from his the pen. Vysogota knew that in the 
north, Kelpie was a sea monster that could according to superstition take the form of horse, a 
dolphin or even a beautiful woman, but in its real form it looked a lot like sea weed. Ciri 
saddled the mare and rode around the pen and hut, after which she returned Kelpie to the pen 
to keep company with the goat, and Ciri returned to the hut to keep Vysogota company. 

She started to help him – probably out of boredom – when working with the skins. While 
he separated the otter skins into size and tone, she divided the muskrats in backs and bellies 
and stretched the skins over a table that they had brought into the house. Her fingers were 
extremely nimble. 

It was while during this task a strange conversation occurred between them. 

 

*** 

 

'You do not know who I am. You could not even imagine who I am.' 

She repeated this trivial statement several times and it bothered him a bit. Of course she 
fail to notice his annoyance, it would have lowered him to betray his feelings to a brat like 
that. No, he could not let it happen, but neither could he betray the curiosity that devoured 
him. 

A curiosity that was unfounded, because he could have easily guessed who she was. In 
the days of Vysogota's youth, gangs were not uncommon. The years have passed, but it could 
not eliminate the magnetic force with which these gangs attracted a girl eager for adventure 
and strong emotions. Which often led to their undoing. The brats who came out of it with a 
scar on their face could say that they had been lucky. For the less lucky they could expect 
torture, the gibbet, the axe or the stake. 


Ha, from the time of Vysogota only one thing has changed – progressive emancipation. 
The band attracted not only the young males but also crazy girls who preferred swords, 
horses and the unbridled life than needles, dishes and waiting for suitors. 

Vysogota did not tell her directly, but gave her a sufficiently clear note that he knew with 
whom he was dealing with. To make her aware that if there was a mystery here it was surely 
not this girl – a girl who was on the road with a gang of bandit teens and had miraculously 
escaped from a trap. A disfigured brat trying to surround herself with a halo of mystery... 

'You do not know who I am. But do not worry, I'll go soon. I will not expose you to 
danger.' 

Vysogota had had enough. 

'What sort of danger?' he said. 'Even if your pursuers found you here, which I doubt, 
what harm could befall me? Assisting runaway criminals is punishable, but not to a hermit 
since he is not aware of the world. My privilege is to accommodate everyone who comes into 
my hermitage. Well, you say I do not know who you are. How could I know, a hermit, who 
you are, if you committed a crime and why the law is chasing you? And what law? I do not 
even know whose law applies in this region and who the representatives of this law are. I do 
not care and it has never interested me, I'm a hermit.' 

He realised he had gone too far. But he would not budge. Her green eyes were full of rage 
and pierced him like knives. 

'I'm a poor hermit. Dead to the world and their work. I am a simple man, uneducated, 
ignorant of worldly affairs...' 

He exaggerated. 

'Sure!' she cried, throwing the skin and the knife onto the floor. 'Do you take me for a 
fool? Well do not think that I am so stupid. A simple hermit. When you were gone I looked 
around your hut. I looked into that corner covered by the curtains. Where you have many 
books of science on the shelves, uh, a simple and uneducated man?' 

Vysogota threw an otter skin onto the pallet. 

'They belonged to a local tax collector,' he waved his hand carelessly. 'When he died, the 
villagers did not know what to do with them and brought them to me. They are land registers 
and accounting books.' 

'You're lying.' Ciri winced and rubbed her scar. 'You are clearly lying to me!' 

He did not answer, pretending to evaluate the next skin tone. 

'You think,' she continued, 'that because you have a white beard, wrinkles and a hundred 
years on the neck that you can effortlessly fool an innocent girl, huh? Well I'll tell you – the 
first duck to pass through here may have been deceived. But I'm not a duck.' 


He raised his eyebrows in silent but provocative question. She did not let him wait too 
long. 

'I, dear hermit, I have studied in places where there were many books, and with some of 
the same title that are on your shelves. I know many of those titles.' 

Vysogota raised his eyebrows even more. She looked him straight in the eye. 

'Incredible tales,' she said, 'you told the ragged tomboy, the dirty orphan, the thief or 
bandit you found in the reeds with the smashed face. But you should know, sir hermit, that I 
have read the History of the World by Roderick de Novembre. I went over and over again, 
the works that bear the titles Materia medica and Herbarius, which is the same one you have 
on your shelf. I also know what the ermine cross on a red shield embossed on the backs of 
your books mean. It is a sign that the books were made at the University of Oxenfurt.' 

She paused, still staring intently. Vysogota was silent; he struggle to make sure his face 
did not betray anything. 

'So I think,' Ciri said, throwing back her head in a move that was characteristic of her, 
proud and somewhat violent, 'that you are not a simpleton or a hermit. That you did not leave 
voluntarily from the world, but you ran away from it. And you hide here in the wilds, masked 
between the impassable swamps.' 

'If so,' Vysogota smiled, 'then our luck has joined in a very strange way, my well-read 
maiden. Destiny has put us together in mysterious ways. At the end of the day, you too, Ciri, 
are hiding. At the end of the day, you too, Ciri, deftly weave around you a veil of 
appearances. I'm old and full of suspicions and mistrust, embittered by age...' 

'Towards me?' 

'Towards the world, Ciri. A world where appearances take the deceptive mask of truth to 
expose other truths, but is false as well as attempting to deceive. To a world in which the 
shield of the University of Oxenfurt is painted on the doors of brothels. To a world where a 
ragged bandit is knowledgeable, wise and may even be of noble birth, who is an intellectual 
and scholar who reads Roderick de Novembre and knows the seal of the Academy. Against 
all appearances. Against the fact that they themselves carry another mark. A criminal tattoo, a 
red rose etched near the groin.' 

'You're right,' her lips tightened and her face flushed so intense that the line of the scar 
was almost black. 'You're a bitter old man. And a musty busybody.' 

'On my shelf, behind the curtain,' he said with a nod, 'is the Aen N'og Mab Taedh'morc, 
a collection of short storied and Elven prophecies. In there is a story that fits this situation and 
conversation. It is the story of the old raven and the swallow. Just like you, Ciri, I'm a 
scholar, so I would like to recite a short passage, I hope my memory does not disappoint. The 
raven, as I remember, accuses the swallow of rashness and inappropriate levity: 

 


Hen Cerbin dic'ss aen n'og Zireael 

Aark, aark, caelm foile, tee veloe, ell? 

Zireael... 

 

He stopped and leaned his elbows on the table and placed his chin onto his extended 
fingers. Ciri shook her head, straightened up and looked at him defiantly. She finished the 
poem. 

 

...Zireael veloe que'ss aen en'ssan irch 

Ma bog, Hen Cerbin, vean ni, quirk, quirk! 

 

'The embittered, suspicious old man,' Vysogota said after a moment of silence, 
'apologizes to the educated maiden. The old raven, who sense fraud and deceit everywhere, 
begs forgiveness from the swallow, whose only fault is that it is young and full of life. And 
pretty...' 

'Now you're raving,' she grumbled, covering the scar on her face in an unconscious 
movement. 'You can save the compliments. They will not mend the scar left on my skin. 
Don't think that is how you are going to win my trust. I still do not know who you really are. 
Why you lied to me about the days and dates. And why you looked between my legs when 
the wound was on my face. And if you were limited to just looking.' 

This time she managed to upset him. 

'How dare you, kid?' he cried. 'I could be your father!' 

'My grandfather,' she corrected him icily. 'Or my great-grandfather. But you're not. I do 
not know who you are. But surely not the person you are pretending to be.' 

'I am the one who found you in the swamp, nearly froze to the bone, with a black mask 
instead of a face, unconscious, filthy and dirty. I am the one who brought you home but did 
not know who you were and had the right to imagine the worst. Who cured you and lay you 
on a bed. Gave you medicine when you were burning with fever. Who took care of you. I 
washed you. Very carefully. Also in the vicinity of the tattoo.' 

Ciri calmed down, but her eyes did not lose the challenging and insolent look. 

'In this world,' she snapped, 'there are those with deceptive appearances that put on a 
mask of truth, as you yourself have said. I also know a little about how this world works. You 
saved me, treated and cured me. Thank you. I am gratefully for your... Kindness. But I know 
there is no kindness without...' 


'Self interest and hope of a favour,' he finished with a smile. 'Yes, I know. I am a man of 
the world, who knows the world as well as you, Ciri. Young women who have been deprived 
of everything that has any value. If you are unconscious or too weak to defend yourselves, 
they usually give free rein to lust and appetite, often depraved or unnatural. Is it not true?' 

'Nothing is as it seems,' Ciri replied, blushing again. 

'An accurate statement,' said the hermit, while adding another skin to the appropriate lot. 
'And how inevitably it leads to the conclusion that we, Ciri, we know nothing about each 
other. We know only the appearances and they lie.' 

He waited a moment, but Ciri did not hasten to say anything. 

'Although we both have succeeded in making a preliminary inquiry, we still don't know 
anything. I do not know who you are, you do not know who I am...' 

This time he deliberately waited. She looked at him and her eyes burned with the question 
he was expecting. Her eyes flashed when she asked: 

'Who will start?' 

 

*** 

 

If someone had crept up to the dark hut with the sunken, overgrown with moss roof and if 
they looked inside, in the firelight of the hearth they would have seen an old man with a 
white beard hunched over bundles of skins. They would have also seen a girl with ashen-hair 
with an ugly scar on her cheek, a scar that did not fit at all with the green eyes as big as a 
child's. 

But nobody could see. The hut was lost in the endless field of reeds, in the middle of a 
swamp where no one dared to enter. 

 

*** 

 

'My name is Vysogota of Corvo. I was a doctor, a surgeon. I was an alchemist. Later I 
worked as a researcher, a philosopher and an ethicist. I was a professor at the University of 
Oxenfurt. I had to flee from there after publishing some work that was considered impious 
and heretical. Then, fifty years ago that charge carried the death penalty. I went into exile. 
My wife did not want to immigrate, so she left me. While on the run I stopped in the far 
south, in the Nilfgaardian Empire. I settled down after a while and became a professor of 
philosophy and ethics at the Imperial Academy in Castell Graupian. I served in that position 


for almost ten years. Then history repeated – I had to flee after the publication of a certain 
treatise... Which by the way, dealt with the totalitarian regime and the criminal nature of the 
wars of occupation, but officially my work and I was branded as clerical heresy and 
metaphysical mysticism. An investigating showed that I was a lackey of expansive and 
revisionist clergy circles that were effectively ruling the Nordling Kingdoms. It seemed like a 
grim joke, considering that these priestly circles had twenty years before issued me with a 
death sentence for atheism. In fact, it had been a long time since the priests in the North had 
lost their influence, but in Nilfgaard they refused to acknowledge it. Combining mysticism 
and politics were prosecuted and punished without mercy.' 

'Today, judging from the perspective of years, I think if I had humbled myself and had 
shown remorse, I'm certain the matter would have been settled and I would have just fallen 
into disgrace with the emperor without having to resort to drastic means. But I was outraged. 
I was sure of my truth, It was timeless and superior to any policy. I felt an injustice. I was 
unjustly wronged by the ruling tyrannies. I had established active contacts with dissidents 
seeking to overthrow the tyranny. Before I could realise I was thrown into prison with my 
new friends. Some of them, when the executioner showed them his tools, identified me as the 
chief ideologue of the underground movement. But before I was executed, I was saved by the 
imperial grace and I was sentenced into exile – under threat of immediate execution of the 
original sentence if I ever returned to imperial lands.' 

'I then got mad at the world, with the kingdoms, empires and universities, with the 
dissidents, civil servants and lawyers. With colleagues and friends who, as if by magic, did 
not want to know me. With my second wife, who similar to the first, thought that her 
husband's problems were reason enough for divorce. With my children, I gave up. I became a 
hermit. Here in Ebbing, in the swamps of Pereplut. I took over the hut where a hermit used to 
live. With all the bad luck I had, Nilfgaard annexed Ebbing, so before I could settle in, I 
found myself again in imperials territory. I had no desire nor the energy to make another 
journey and so I decided to hide. Imperial verdicts are never time-barred, even when the 
Emperor who issued it is long dead, and the current emperor has had little reason to recall it. 
The death sentence remains in force, as is the custom and law in Nilfgaard. Sentences for 
high treason do not expire and are not subject to amnesty. At the coronation of every new 
emperor, everyone is pardoned who was denounced by his predecessor – except for traitors. 
Therefore it makes no difference to me who sits on the throne – if I violate the decision of the 
court to exile me and if I am arrested, my head will fall on the scaffold.' 

'So you see, dear Ciri, we are both in a similar situation.' 

'What is ethics? I knew, but I have forgotten.' 

'The science of morality. The rules of customary behaviour, nobility, benevolence and 
honesty. From the heights of good which elevates the human soul to morality and 
righteousness. And from the depth of evil which brings it down to wickedness and 
immorality...' 


'The heights of good!' she snorted. 'Righteousness! Morality! Don't make me laugh, or 
you'll make my scar open up again. You had the devil's own luck, that they didn't manage to 
send a bounty hunter, such as... Bonhart. You learned the depth of evil. Ethics? To hell with 
your ethics, Vysogota of Corvo. It is not the wicked and immoral people who sink into the 
abyss, no! Oh, no! There are the bad, but determined and there are those who are decent, 
honest and noble, but clumsy, hesitant but full of scruples.' 

'Thank you for your teachings,' he said jokingly. 'Believe me, even if you live for a 
century, it is never too late to learn something new. Truly, it is always helpful to hear from 
mature people who have experienced the world.' 

'Laugh,' she shook her head. 'Laugh while you can, because now it is my turn. Now I'll 
entertain you with a story. I'll tell you what happened to me. And when I'm finished, we'll 
see if you still want to joke.' 

 

*** 

 

If someone had crept up to the hut in the swamp after dark, and looked through a crack in 
the shutters and saw into the room, he would have seen in the dim light a white-bearded old 
man intently listening to an ashen-haired girl sitting on a stump by the fire. He would she that 
she speaks slowly, as if it was hard to find words, rubbing her cheek that was distorted by a 
scar nervously, and intertwined with long moments of silence, tells the story of her fate. A 
story about teaching she received that proved to be all false and misleading. On the promises 
made to her that had not been kept. A story about doom, where she learned to believe, but 
was shamefully betrayed. The fact that every time she was beginning to hope for a change for 
the better, she was subjected to humiliation. Humiliation, injustice and pain. The fact that 
those who she trusted and loved, betrayed her, did not come to her aid when she was 
threatened with violation, suffering and death. The councils, that according to people should 
be true to their ideals, failed whenever they wanted to build and thus proved to be useless. 
The help, friendship and love of those in which support and friendship had never been looked 
for – to say nothing about love. 

But no one could see or hear. The hut with the sunken roof was enveloped in an 
impenetrable fog in a swamp, where no one dared to go. 

 

*** 

 

 

 


When a young girl enters adolescence, dreams examine hitherto inaccessible areas, which 
are represented by a hidden chamber... As the girl approaches the fateful spot, she has to 
climb a spiral staircase, and in dreams those stairs typically mean sexual experiences. She 
passes over the stairs to a small locked door, which has a key in the lock... A small locked 
room in dreams often means the vagina, the turn of the key in a lock symbolizes the sex act. 

 

Bruno Bettelheim 

The Uses of Enchantment 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


