Chapter Five 

Milva did not manage to reach or save the horses.
She witnessed the theft, but she was a witness who could not do anything.
First, she was seized in a frenzied, panicked crowd, then the way was barred by rushing wagons and then she plunged into a flock of woolly sheep, which she waded through like a snow drift.
She eventually jumped into the mud and reeds on the shore of the Chotla, which saved her form the swords of the Nilfgaardians who were mercilessly everyone, giving no quarter even to women or children.
Milva threw herself into the water and escaped to the other side, partly wading, partly by swimming on her back among the corpses being washed away.
She continued her chase.
She remembered the direction the peasants went in, who stole Roach, Pegasus, the chestnut stallion and her own black.
And on the saddle of the black was her priceless bow.
Nothing can be done, she thought as she started to run in her water-soaked boots, the others will just have to fend for themselves for now.
I, damn it, I have to recover my bow and my horse! She first recovered Pegasus.
The Poet's gelding was ignoring the kicks to the ribs and the cries of the peasant who was riding him.
He would not gallop and walked among a birch grove sluggishly, lazy and slow.
The peasant was left far behind the rest of the horse thieves.
When he heard and saw Milva approaching from behind, he jumped off the horse without thinking directly into the bushes, while holding his pants with both hands.
Milva did not pursue him, overcoming her strong desire to kill.
She jumped into the saddle, ringing the lute strings strapped to the saddle.
Familiar with the horse, she was able to force the gelding to a gallop.
Or rather a sluggish run, which Pegasus considered a gallop.
But even this pseudo-gallop was enough to catch the horse thieves, since their escape was slowed by a more unusual horse: Roach, the witcher's bay mare, which Geralt had promised more than once to replace with a donkey, mule or even a goat.
Milva overtook the thieves when the unskilful rider pulling on Roach's reins fell to the ground and the rest of the peasants jumped from their saddles, trying to tame the frisky, kicking mare.
They were so busy that they did not noticed when Milva came up on Pegasus and kicked one in the face, breaking his nose.
When he fell back, crying and begging for divine help, she recognized him.
It was Clogs.
He apparently had no luck with the people he encountered.
And especially Milva.
Milva, unfortunately also ran out of luck.
Specifically speaking, luck was not to blame, but her own arrogance and belief she could beat up a couple of peasants a much as she wished.
But when she dismounted from the saddle, she was suddenly punched in the eye and not knowing how ended up on the ground.
She drew her knife, determined to spill some guts, but was hit over the head with a thick stick, which broke, covering her eyes with bark and rotten wood.
Stunned and blinded, she managed to grab the knee of the peasant who still held the remains of the stick; however, suddenly the peasant fell down screaming.
The other shouted and covered his head with both hands.
Milva wiped her eyes and saw that he was being covered in blows from a whip from a rider on a grey horse.
She rose and hit the peasant in the neck.
Wheezing the thief's legs buckled.
Milva used this as an advantage to vent her rage in a kick.
The peasant curled up, clutching his hands to his crotch and screamed until leaves rained down from the surrounding birches.
The rider on the grey horse, managed to drive the other man and Clogs, who was still bleeding from his nose, into to the forest with blows from his whip.
He turned his horse back towards the howling man, but pulled it up short.
For Milva had already caught up to her black horse and in her hand held her bow with an arrow already on the string.
The string was only at half tension, but the tip of the arrow was pointed directly at the rider's chest.
For a moment the rider and the girl stared at each other.
Then the rider, with slow movements, drew from his belt an arrow with long feathered fletching and threw it at Milva's feet.
'I knew,' he said calmly, 'I would get the chance to give you back your arrow, elf.' 'I'm not an elf, Nilfgaardian.' 'I'm not a Nilfgaardian.
So put down the bow.
If I wished you any evil, I would have let those peasants beat you.' 'The devil knows who you are,' she said, 'but thank you for the help.
And my arrow.
And for the evil bastard I kicked.' The horse thief, who had been kicked was curled in a ball and began to sob, with his face buried in the leaves.
The rider did not look at him.
He watched Milva.
'Catch the horses,' he said.
'We need to move away from the river quickly, the army is spread through the forest on both banks.' 'We?' Milva frowned, lowering the bow.
'Together? Since when are we friends? Or companions?' 'I'll explain,' he said turning his horse and grabbing the reins of the chestnut stallion, 'if you give me time.' 'That's the thing we don't have.
The witcher and the rest...' 'I know.
But we will not be able to save them if we are killed or captured.
Grab the horses and follow me into the forest.
Hurry!' *** He is called Cahir, Milva recalled, casting a look at her strange companion who was sitting on a fallen tree.
The strange Nilfgaardian who says he isn't a Nilfgaardian.
Cahir.
'We thought that you had been killed,' she said, 'the chestnut caught up to us without a rider.' 'I had a small adventure,' he answered dryly.
'Three bandits, hairy as werewolves, jumped out at me in an ambush.
The horse ran away.
The bandits didn't manage to, but they were on foot.
Before I managed to find a new mount, I was far behind you.
I only caught up this morning before you entered the camp.
I crossed the river and waited for you on this bank, because I knew you were heading east.' One of the horses hidden in the alders stamped it's hoof.
It was growing dark.
Mosquitoes began to buzz around their ears.
'The woods are quiet.' Cahir said.
'The army is gone.
The battle must be over.' 'The massacre, you mean.' 'Our cavalry...' he stammered, clearing his throat.
'The imperial cavalry struck the camp, and then from the south your army attacked.
Probably Temerian.' 'If the fighting is over then we must go back there.
We need to look for the witcher, Dandelion and the others.' 'It will be wiser to wait until nightfall.' 'This is a horrible place,' she said softly, squeezing her bow.
'Grim and chilling.
Not even a breeze moves through here, but something keeps making noises in the bushes... The witcher talked about ghouls being attracted to battlefields... And the peasants spoke of vampires...' 'You are not alone.' He soothed his companion.
'A lonely man has more reason to fear.' 'Certainly.' She understood his meaning.
'You have been following us for almost two weeks, alone.
Behind are you people and all around is your army... Although you say that you are not Nilfgaardian, you did belong with them once.
And the devil take me if I understand... Instead of going back to your people, you follow after the witcher.
Why?' 'It is a long story.' *** When the tall Scoia'tael bent over him, tied to a post as he was, Struycken closed his eyes in horror.
It was said that there are no ugly elves, they are all born beautiful.
Perhaps the legendary leader of the Scoia'tael was born beautiful too.
But now his face was cut diagonally with an ugly scar that disfigured his forehead, eyebrow, nose and cheek, of his elven beauty, nothing was left.
The elf sat down on a cracked tree trunk lying on its side.
'My name is Isengrim Faoiltiarna,' he said, leaning over the prisoner again.
'For four years I have fought with humans, for three years I have run my own command.
I buried a fallen brother in a struggle, four cousins and more than forty comrades.
In my fight for your Emperor I have been an ally who has repeatedly proved myself by submitting intelligence to your Secret Service and helping your agents eliminate inconvenient people.' Faoiltiarna paused and waved his gloved hand.
The Scoia'tael beside him picked up a small box made of birch bark.
A sweet scent rose from the box.
'I thought and still think Nilfgaard is my ally,' the scarred Scoia'tael said, 'so I at first did not believe it when my informant warned me that they were preparing to ambush me.
That when I was to meet alone with the Nilfgaardian emissary, I would be captured.
I did not believe my ears, but being cautious by nature, I arrived at the meeting a little early and not alone.
You can imagine how great my surprise and disappointment was when it turned out that at the secret meeting place, instead of an emissary, waiting for me was six thugs equipped with fishing nets, ropes, a leather hood with a gag and a shirt with belts and buckles attached to it.
Equipment, I would say, that is commonly used by your Secret Service agents.
The Secret Service of Nilfgaard wanted to capture me, Faoiltiarna, alive, take me somewhere, gagged and fastened to the ears in a straightjacket.
A puzzling matter, I would say.
Requiring an explanation.
I was pleased that at least one of the thugs survived, was captured and will be willing to give me an explanation.' Struycken gritted his teeth and turned his head so as not to look at the scarred face of the elf.
He preferred to look at the box made of birch bark, around which to wasps buzzed.
'Now, then,' Faoiltiarna continued, wiping the sweat from his brow with a handkerchief, 'talk, Mister.
To facilitate the discussion I will clarify a few things.
In this box is maple syrup.
If our conversation does not proceeded in the spirit of mutual understanding and far-reaching sincerity, said maple syrup will be generously smeared onto your head.
With particular emphasis on the eyes and ears.
Then we will put you on an anthill, oh, look, that's exactly where those nice and laborious insects scamper.
Let me assure you that the method has already proven itself perfectly for a few Dh'oine and an'givare who showed me stubbornness and lack of sincerity.' 'I'm in the imperial service!' yelled the spy, turning pale.
'I am an officer in the imperial Secret Service, subordinate to Vattiera de Rideaux, Viscount of Eiddon! My name is Jan Struycken! I protest...' 'A fatal meeting of circumstances,' interrupted the elf, 'you see the local forest ants have herd of maple syrup, they haven't ever heard of Lord de Rideaux.
Let us begin.
I will not ask who gave the order to kidnap me, because it is obvious.
My first question is then: Where were you to take me?' The Nilfgaardian spy struggled in the ropes; he shook his head, because it seemed to him that the ants were already crawling on his cheeks.
He remained silent, however.
'A pity,' Faoiltiarna muttered, giving a sign to the elf holding the box.
'Smear him.' 'I was to transport you to Verden, to the castle Nastrog!' Struycken roared.
'At the command of Lord de Rideaux!' 'Thank you.
What was waiting for me in Nastrog?' 'An interrogation...' 'What questions were you to ask?' 'About what happened in Thanedd! I beg you, untie me! I will tell you everything!' 'Of course you're going to tell me everything,' drawled the elf.
'Especially since the beginning is behind us and the beginning is always the hardest.
Continue.' 'I had orders to force you to confess where you are hiding Rience, Vilgefortz and Cahir Mawr Dyffryn aep Ceallach!' 'Amusing.
You set a trap to ask me about Rience and Vilgefortz? What can I know about them? Where can you join them? And the matter of Cahir is even more amusing.
I sent him back to you, just as you wished.
In fetters.
Has the shipment not arrived yet?' 'The detachment was killed at the meeting place... Cahir was not among those killed...' 'Oh, and Vattier de Rideaux became suspicious? But instead of sending another emissary to the towns to one of my commandos to ask for clarification, he decided to ambush me.
He orders me dragged to Nastrog for questioning.
About the events of Thanedd.' The spy remained silent.
'Did you not understand?' The elf leaned over him with his horrible face.
'That was a question.
What is it?' 'I do not know... I do not know, I swear...' Faoiltiarna waved his hand.
Struycken screamed, writhed and cursed the Great Sun, swearing his ignorance, he shook his head and spat out the thick syrup they cast into his face.
Only when he had been carried by four Scoia'tael to the anthill did he talk.
He tried to banish the idea that the consequences could be worse than the ants.
'Sir... If anyone hears about this, I'm dead... But I'll tell you... I saw secret orders.
I overheard... I will tell you everything...' 'That is obvious,' the elf nodded.
'The record on the anthill is one hour and forty minutes and belongs to a certain official of king Demavend's special forces.
But he also spoke in the end.
Come on, begin.
Fast, neat and to the point.' 'The Emperor is convinced that those at Thanedd betrayed him.
The traitor Vilgefortz Roggeveen, sorcerer.
And his assistant, called Rience.
And above all, Cahir Mawr Dyffryn aep Ceallach.
Vattier... Lord Vattier is not sure that you have not been dipping your fingers into this betrayal, even unknowingly... So I was ordered to capture and secretly transport you to Nastrog... Sir Faoiltiarna, twenty years I have worked in the Secret Service... Vattier de Rideaux is my third commander...' 'Briefly, please.
And stop shaking.
If you are sincere with me, you will still have the chance to serve a few more commanders.' 'It was the deepest state secret, but I learned who Vilgefortz and Cahir caught on the island.
I faced the fact that they had succeeded.
Because they took to Loc Grim... What's her name... Yes, the princess of Cintra.
We thought it was a success and Rience and Cahir would be made Barons, and the sorcerer an Earl at least... But instead the Emperor called Kalous.
I mean Lord Skellen and Lord Vattier and ordered the capture of Cahir... and Rience and Vilgefortz... Everyone who might know something about the events on Thanedd had to be subjected to torture... And you too... It was not hard to imagine... Well, there had to have been treason.
They had brought to Loc Grim a false princess...' The spy took a deep breath and his mouth flooded with maple syrup.
'Untie him,' Faoiltiarna ordered the Squirrels, 'And wash your face.' The order was carried out immediately.
After a while, the organizer of the failed ambush was standing with bowed head before the Scoia'tael leader.
Faoiltiarna regarded him with indifference.
'Wipe the syrup from your ears carefully,' he said a last.
'and listen to what I am about to tell you.
Exercise your memory, as benefits a spy with many years of practice.
I will give you proof of my loyalty to the Emperor, I'll give you a full account of the matter that are of interest to you.
But you will repeat everything to Vattier de Rideaux, word for word.' The spy nodded eagerly.
'In mid Blathe, that is, by your reckoning the beginning of June,' began the elf, 'The sorceress Enid an Gleanna, also known as Francesca Findabair, established contact with me.
At her command there soon arrived to my commando unit a certain Rience, reportedly a factotum of Vilgefortz of Roggeveen, also a sorcerer.
In the deepest secrecy a plan of action was developed, aimed at eliminating a number of wizards at the Congress on the island of Thanedd.
The plan was presented to me as an action that had the full support of the Emperor Emhyr, Vattier de Rideaux and Stefan Skellen, otherwise I would not have agrees to cooperate with the Dh'oine, sorcerers or not, because I have seen too many provocations in my life.
The involvement of the empire in this affair was confirmed at Cape Bremervoord by the arrival of the vessel that brought Cahir, the son of Ceallach, equipped with special powers of attorney and orders.
According to these orders I was to appoint a small group of my commandos which was subject only to Cahir.
The group was tasked with abducting from the island... a certain person.' 'We sailed to Thanedd,' Faoiltiarna took a moment, 'on the ship that Cahir arrived on.
Rience had amulets which he used to cover the ship in magic mist.
We sailed the boat into caverns beneath the island.
From there we came to the basement under Garstang.' 'Already in the basement, we knew that something was wrong, Rience received some telepathic communication from Vilgefortz.
We knew that when we began our march we would be entering into an on-going struggle.
We were ready.
And this was a good thing, because right after we left the basement, all hell broke loose.' The elf twisted his heavily scarred face, as if the memories pained him.
'After some initial success, things began to unravel.
We could not eliminate all of the king's witches and suffered big losses.
Some of the magicians on our side were killed, others wanting to save their own skin, teleported away.
At some point Vilgefortz disappeared, the Rience disappeared and soon after them Enid an Gleanna.
The last disappearance I took as the definitive signal to retreat.
I did not want to issue the order until the return of Cahir and his group, who had at the beginning of the action gone to perform his mission.
Since they had not returned, we started searching for them.' Faoiltiarna looked into his eyes of the Nilfgaardian spy.
'Not a single member of the group was left alive; they had all been killed in a brutal manner.
I found Cahir on the steps leading to Tor Lara, the tower which exploded during the fight and was reduced to ruins.
He was wounded and unconscious, it was clear that he had not fulfilled the mission entrusted to him.
In the surrounding area there was no sign of the object of his mission, and below in Loxia and Aretuza had been occupied by king's men.
I knew there was no way that Cahir could fall into their hands, because it would have been proof of Nilfgaard's participation in the action.
I took him and ran to the basement, to the caverns.
We boarded the ship and set sail.
Of all of the commandos there were no more than twelve left and they were mostly wounded.' 'The wind favoured us.
We disembarked west of Hirundum and hid in the woods.
Cahir tore at his bandages, shouting something about a crazy lady with green eyes, about Ciri the lion of Cintra, about a witcher who had destroyed his group and about a sorcerer who flew like a bird towards the Tower of Gulls.
He asked for a horse and ordered us back to the island, claiming it was the Emperor's orders, which, in this situation, I had to consider the ravings of a madman.
In Aedirn, as we already knew, the war was already raging and I thought it best to put together a new squad and resume the fighting against the Dh'oine.' 'Cahir was still with us when I found the contact box which contained your secret orders.
I was surprised.
Cahir, although it was clear that his mission had failed, nothing indicated that he was guilty of treason.
However, I did not think too much of it, I thought it was your affair and you ought to solve it yourselves.
Cahir, when he was tied up, offered no resistance, he was calm and resigned.
I sent him in a wooden coffin and with the help of a hav'caaren friend, had him taken to the place indicated in the orders.
I admit I had no desire to weaken my squad in an escort for him.
I do not know who murdered your people at the meeting place.
And only I knew the location.
So if this version of events does not correspond entirely with the death of your unit, then look for traitors at home, because apart from you and me, only I knew the time and the place.' Faoiltiarna stood up.
'That's all.
All of the information I have provided is true.
Even in the dungeons of Nastrog you would not have gotten more.
Lies and fabrication, which I probably would have provided to your torturer, would have proved to be harmful to you, rather than help.
I do not know anything more, in particular, I do not know the whereabouts of Vilgefortz and Rience, I also don't know whether to rightly suspect them of treason.
And to tell you the truth, I know nothing about the princess of Cintra, neither true nor false.
I have told you everything I know.
I hope that Lord de Rideaux and Stefan Skellen no longer wish to ambush me.
Dh'oine have long tried to capture or kill me, so I have developed the habit of killing all who try.
In the future, I will not wait to see if any of the agents are sent by chance on the orders of Vattier or Skellen.
I am not going to have the time or the inclination.
Have I made myself clear?' Struycken nodded, swallowing.
'So take your horse, spy and get out of my woods.' *** 'You endured the torment in that coffin they carried you in,' Milva murmured.
'I don't understand.
Why didn't you go to a town and hide, why follow after the witcher? He hates you... The two times he saved your life...' 'Three times.' 'Twice I was there.
Though you are not the sorcerer who broke the witcher's bones at Thanedd, I don't think it is safe for you to get close to his sword.
What is between you I don't understand, but you saved me and I look at you kindly... So I tell you, Cahir, the witcher is looking for those who kidnapped Ciri and took her to Nilfgaard, he grits his teeth so much that sparks fly.
And when he spits, the saliva hisses.' 'Ciri,' he repeated.
'Beautiful name.' 'You didn't know it?' 'No.
For me it has always been said Cirilla or young lion of Cintra... And when she was with me... Because she was once... She didn't say a word.
Although I saved her life.' 'It'd take the devil to understand this,' she said.
'Your destiny, Cahir, is intricate and complex.
Not for my head.' 'And what is your name?' he asked suddenly.
'Milva... Maria Barring.
But they call me, Milva.' 'The witcher is moving in the wrong direction, Milva,' he said after a moment.
'Ciri is not in Nilfgaard.
It was not Nilfgaard who kidnapped her.
If she was kidnapped.' 'How is that?' 'It's a long story.' *** 'By the Great Sun,' Fringilla standing in the threshold, tilted her head in surprise and looked at her friend.
'What have you done with your hair, Assire?' 'I have washed it,' Assire var Anahid replied dryly.
'And curled it.
Come in, please, sit down.
Get out of the chair, Merlin.
Shoo!' The sorceress sat in the place the black cat has reluctantly vacated, still staring at her friend's hair.
'Stop staring at me,' Assire's hand touched the fluffy shiny curls.
'I decided to change a bit.
Anyway, I followed your example.' 'I,' Fringilla Vigo laughed, 'have always been considered unruly and rebellious.
But when they see you at the academy or the court...' 'I do not go to court,' said Assire.
'And the academy will have to get used to it.
This is the thirteenth century; it is high time we break superstition that attention to our external appearance shows frivolity and weakness of mind.' 'The nails too,' Fringilla narrowed her green eyes, which did not miss anything.
'I do not recognise you, my dear.' 'A simple spell,' the sorceress answered coldly, 'should be enough to prove I'm not a Doppler.
Cast the spell, if you must.
And then let's move on to discuss the reason I invited you.' Fringilla Vigo stroked the cat that rubbed against her leg, purring and stretching, pretending it was a gesture of affection, not a veiled suggestion that the black-haired sorceress was in it's chair.
'Is it true,' she said, without raising her head, 'that Seneschal Ceallach aep Gryffyd visited you, right?' 'Yes,' Assire confirmed.
'Ceallach visited me, in despair, asking me for help for intercession, with his son, whom Emperor Emhyr has ordered captured, tortured and executed.
To whom is a desperate father to turn to, if not a relative? Mawr, Ceallach's wife, the mother of Cahir, is my niece, my sister's youngest daughter.
Despite this, I promised nothing.
Because I cannot do anything in this case.
Recently, circumstances have arisen that do not allow me to pull attention to myself.
Let me explain it to you.
But first, let me hear the information I asked you to collect.' Fringilla secretly breathed a sigh of relief.
She was afraid that her friend wanted to get involved in the business of Cahir, the son of Ceallach, a matter that smelled of the scaffold.
And if she had been asked for help, she would not be able to refuse.
'About mid-July,' she began, 'the entire court of Loc Grim had the opportunity to admire a fifteen year old girl, who was allegedly the princess of Cintra, which, during the audience, Emhyr portrayed as the queen and treated her so graciously, that rumours spread about the imminent marriage.' 'I heard,' Assire stroke the cat, which had become discouraged that Fringilla would not move, considered the possibility of getting into another chair, 'that there is still talk about this undoubtedly political marriage.' 'But in lower voices and less often.
Because the Cintran princess has been taken to Darn Rowan.
Darn Rowan, as you know, is usually known for housing prisoners.
Rarely women candidates for empress.' Assire made no comment.
She waited patiently; looking at her recently filed and painted nails.
'Undoubtedly, you remember,' Fringilla Vigo continued, 'how three years ago, Emhyr called us all and ordered us to establish the whereabouts of a person.
In the area of the Northern Kingdoms.
Undoubtedly, you remember how mad he was when we did not succeed.
Albrich, who explained that it was impossible to probe so far, let alone pass the screens.
And now listen.
A week after the famous Loc Grim audience when celebrating the victory of Aldersberg, Emhyr suddenly noticed Albrich and me and honoured us with a conversation.
The meaning of his speech, without trivializing too much goes as follows: "You are freeloaders, indolent and lazy.
Your fairground tricks cost me a fortune and I get no benefit from them.
The task that I set for your pitiful academy was completed by a simple astrologer in four days."' Assire var Anahid snorted with contempt, still stroking the cat.
'I found out easily,' Fringilla continued, 'that the astrologer was none other than the infamous Xarthisius.' 'So the person that was sought, this Cintran, is to be the candidate for empress.
And Xarthisius found her.
Then what? Was he appointed Secretary of State? Head of the Department of Impossible Tasks?' 'No.
They threw him in the dungeon a week later.' 'I'm afraid I don't understand what this has to do with Cahir, son of Ceallach.' 'Patience.
Let me do this is order, It is necessary.' 'Sorry.
I'm listening.' 'Do you remember what Emhyr gave us three years ago when we began to look?' 'A lock of hair.' 'Right.' Fringilla reached into her purse.
'Precisely this hair.
The light hair of a girl of six years.
I kept a few.
And it had paid off because, the person who cares for the Cintran princess isolated at Darn Rowan id Stella Congreve, Countess of Liddertal.
Stella some time ago contracted some debts of gratitude to me, so it was no problem gaining possession of a second lock of hair.
This one.
It is somewhat darker, but hair darkens with age.
Nevertheless, the locks belong to two completely different people.
I have examined them and there is no doubt about it.' 'I imagined a revelation of this kind,' Assire admitted, 'as soon as I heard that the Cintran had been isolated in Darn Rowan.
The astrologer either failed to find the correct subject or was pulled into a conspiracy to provide a fake person to Emhyr.
The conspiracy that will cost the head of Cahir aep Ceallach.
Thank you, Fringilla.
Everything is clear.' 'Not everything,' the black-haired sorceress shook her head.
'First, it was Xarthisius who found the Cintran, it was he who brought her to Loc Grim.
The astrologer began to read horoscopes after he realized that he had brought a false princess to Emhyr and began an intensive search for the truth.
And the crazy old man ended up in the dungeons for a stupid mistake in his art or for fraud.
All I have been able to establish, is that he was able to determine the whereabouts of the wanted person to within a hundred mile radius.
And this was an desert, an uninhabited desert somewhere beyond the mountains of Tir Tochair behind the Velda river.
Stefan Skellen, who was sent there, found nothing but scorpions and vultures.' 'I would not have expected anything else from Xarthisius.
But this will not have any influence on the issue of Cahir.
Emhyr is angry, but he does not send anyone to torture and death for no reason.
As you yourself have said, someone arranged for the fake princess to be delivered to Loc Grim.
Someone has found a double.
So there is a conspiracy and Cahir has been drawn into it.
I will not rule out that it was unconsciously.
That he was used.' 'If he had, they would have done so until the end.
He would have been the one to bring the double to Emhyr.
But Cahir has disappeared without a trace.
Why? After all his disappearance had to awaken suspicion.
Could he have expected Emhyr would spot the fraud at first sight? Because he would realize.
Would realize because he was...' 'A lock of hair,' interrupted Assire.
'A lock of hair from a six year old girl.
Fringilla, Emhyr has not been looking for this girl for three years, but much longer.
It seems that Cahir has been pulled into something terrible, something that began when he was still riding around on a stick pretending it was a horse.
Humm... Leave me this lock of hair.
I would like to do some tests.' Fringilla shook her head slowly, her green eyes narrowing.
'I'll leave it.
But be cautious, Assire.
Do not get into something terrible.
Because this will draw attention to you.
At the beginning of the conversation you mentioned that you could not afford it.
You promised clarify the reasons.' Assire var Anahid rose and went to the window, she stared out at the setting sun glistening on the roofs and towers of Nilfgaard, the capital of the Empire, called the City of Golden Towers.
'You said once, and I remember,' she said without turning around, 'that magic should not be divided by borders.
That the good of magic should be the greatest good, which should be above all kinds of divisions.
Something like that would require... a secret organisation... something like a convent or a lodge...' 'I'm ready,' Fringilla answered the unspoken question of the Nilfgaardian sorceress.
'I am determined and ready to proceed.
Thank you for the trust and honour.
When and where is the meeting of this lodge, my secretive and mysterious friend?' Assire var Anahid the Nilfgaardian sorceress turned around.
On her lips was a shadow of a smile.
'Soon,' she said.
'Now I will explain everything.
But before I do... I'll give you the address of my seamstress, Fringilla.' *** 'Not a single fire,' Milva whispered staring at the dark shore of the river, whose surface glistening in the moonlight.
'Not a soul there either.
The camp held two hundred refugees.
Did no one save their neck?' 'If the imperials won, they would have taken everyone into slavery,' Cahir replied, also in a whisper.
'If your side won, they would have taken the refugees away from this place.' They moved closer to the shore, to the overgrown marsh reeds.
Milva stepped on something and jumped back, stifling a cry at the sight of a hand emerging from the mud covered in leeches.
'It's just a corpse,' Cahir muttered grabbing her arm, 'Ours.
A Daerlan.' 'Who?' 'The Seventh Daerlan Cavalry brigade.
White scorpion on his sleeve...' 'Gods,' she shuddered violently, clutching her bow in her sweaty fist.
'Did you hear that voice? What was it?' 'A wolf.' 'Or a ghoul... Or some other damned soul.
There must be a lot of dead bodies in the camp... The plague, I will not go to the other shore at night!' 'We'll wait until dawn... Milva? What is that strange...' 'Regis...' The archer suppressed a cry, smelling the smell of wormwood, sage, coriander and anise.
'Regis is that you?' 'It is I,' the surgeon quietly appeared out of the darkness.
'I was worried about you.
You are not alone, I can see.' 'You see well,' Milva let go of Cahir's arm, who had already reached for his sword.
'I am not alone but the same cannot be said about yourself.
Regis, where is the witcher? Dandelion? And the rest? Do you know what happened to them?' 'I know.
Do you have the horses?' 'We have them.
Among the reeds...' 'Then we head south, following the course of the Chotla.
Without delay.
Before midnight we must be in Armeria.' 'What about the witcher and the poet? Do they live?' 'They live.
But they are in trouble.' 'What trouble?' 'It is a long story.' *** Dandelion groaned, trying to turn around and put himself in a more comfortable position.
However, it was an impossible task for someone who was lying in a pile of sawdust and shavings and was bound with ropes like a ham about to be smoked.
'We were not handed immediately,' he gasped.
'There is hope...' 'Calm down,' the witcher lay quietly, watching the moon visible through a hole in the roof of the woodshed.
'Do you know why Vissegerd didn't hang us right away? Because we are to be executed publicly at dawn, when the entire army has gathered.
For propaganda.' Dandelion was silent.
Geralt heard him sniff regretfully.
'You still have a chance to escape,' he said to appease him.
'Vissegerd wants to carry out his private vendetta against me, but he has nothing against you.
Your Count friend will get you out of prison, you'll see.' 'Bullshit,' replied the bard, to the astonishment of the witcher, calmly and quite reasonably.
'Bullshit, bullshit, bullshit.
Do not treat me like a child.
First, for propaganda purposes, hanging two is better than hanging one.
Secondly, I witness a personal vendetta, he will not leave me alive.
No, brother, we'll swing together.' 'Stop, Dandelion.
Stay quietly and think of a plan.' 'What plan, dammit?' 'Anything.' The speech of the poet prevented the witcher from concentrating.
He needs something.
He expected at any moment the woodshed would be invaded by Temerian military intelligence, who would certainly be working for Vissegerd.
The Secret Service would certainly like to ask him about the various details of the events at Garstang on island of Thanedd.
Geralt knew almost no details, but he knew that before the agents would believe him, he would become very, very sick.
His only hope was on Vissegerd, blinded by the desire for revenge, had not notified the agents of his capture.
The Secret Service would be able to remove the prisoners for the claws of the angry Marshal and take them back to their headquarters.
More precisely, they could take back to their headquarters what was left of the prisoners after the first interrogation.
At that moment the poet thought of a plan.
'Geralt! We can act like we know something important.
That we are really spies or something like that.
Then...' 'Have mercy, Dandelion.' 'We can also try and bribe the guards.
I have money hidden.
Doubloon, sewn into the lining of my shoe.
For a rainy day... Call the guards...' 'And then they take everything and you still swing.' The poet recoiled in disgust, but then relented.
From the camp they could hear cries, the stamping of horses and worse, the smell of the soldier's pea soup, a bowl of which at the moment Geralt would give all the steak and truffles in the world.
The guards standing next to the shed chatted idly, laughing and occasionally cleared their throats and spat for long periods.
The guard were professional soldiers, it was possible for them to communicate using compound sentences with pronouns exclusively filthy and disgusting.
'Geralt?' 'What?' 'I wonder what happened to Milva... And Zoltan, Percival and Regis... Did you see?' 'No.
I have not ruled out that during the fighting they were cut down or trampled by horses.
There in the camp, lay their bodies.' 'I don't believe that,' said Dandelion, stubbornly and with hope in his voice.
'I do not believe that people as sly as Zoltan, Percival... Or Milva...' 'Stop deluding yourself.
Even if they survived, they cannot help us.' 'Why?' 'For three reasons.
First, because they have their own problems.
Second, because we lie bound in a shed which is located in the center of a camp of an army of several thousand people.' 'And the third reason? You mentioned three.' 'Third,' he replied wearily, 'the limit of miracles for this month has already been exhausted when the women of Kernow found their missing husbands.' *** 'There,' the surgeon said, pointing out the glowing dots of campfires.
'There is the fort of America, the current troop camp for the Temerian army concentrated in Mayena.' 'The witcher and Dandelion are imprisoned there?' Milva stood in her stirrups.
'Ha, it is so dark... There will be crowds of armed people around and guards.
We will not be able to approach undetected.' 'You will not have to,' Regis said, dismounting from Pegasus.
The gelding snorted, irritated by the herbal aroma floating from his rider.
'You will not have to sneak.' He repeated.
'I can handle this myself.
You go with the horses towards the brightest star of the Seven Goats.
Wait at the river where the Chotla empties into the Ina.
When I manage to free the witcher, we'll head in that direction.
There we will meet.' 'He is highly arrogant,' Cahir whispered to Milva after dismounting from their horses found them close to each other.
'Alone, without any help he is going into trouble, did you hear? Who is he?' 'I truly, do not know,' whispered Milva.
'But I believe what he says.
Yesterday with his bare hands, he pulled a horseshoe out of red hot coals, before my eyes...' 'A wizard?' 'No,' Regis said from behind Pegasus, giving evidence of exceptionally sensitive hearing.
'Is it that important? I do not ask for your personal details.' 'I am Cahir Mawr Dyffryn aep Ceallach.' 'Thank you and I am full of admiration,' the surgeon's voice held a hint of mockery.
'as that Nilfgaardian name was pronounced with almost no accent.' 'I'm not...' 'Enough!' Milva cut him off.
'There is no time to argue and dawdle.
Regis, the witcher is waiting for a rescue.' 'Not before midnight,' the surgeon said coldly, looking at the moon.
'So we have time to talk.
Who is this man, Milva?' 'This man,' the archer said, getting angry, 'helped me out of trouble.
This man will tell the witcher when he meets with him, that we are going the wrong way.
Ciri is not in Nilfgaard.' 'Indeed, a revelation.' The surgeon's voice softened.
'And what is your source, esteemed Cahir, son of Ceallach?' 'That is a long story.' *** Dandelion had been silent a long time when one of the soldiers set to guard them broke off his conversation in mid curse, slurring, a second one groaning.
Geralt know that that there were three of them, so he listened, but the third soldier issued no sound.
He waited with bated breath.
The sound that caught his ear was not the opening of a creaking door, but the sound of snoring.
The guards had fallen asleep on duty.
He exhaled and cursed without a sound and was ready to immerse himself in thoughts of Yennefer when the witcher medallion around his neck quivered suddenly and a powerful smell struck his nostrils of wormwood, basil, coriander, save and anise.
And God knows what else.
'Regis?' he whispered in disbelief, unsuccessfully trying to raise his head from the floor.
'Regis,' Dandelion whispered back, moving and rustling.
'No one else stinks so... Where are you? I cannot see you...' 'Quiet.' The medallion stopped vibrating, Geralt heard a sigh of relief from the poet and immediately after heard the sound of a knife cutting through rope.
A moment later, Dandelion groaned with pain caused by the circulation being restored to his limbs, he tried to supress the groans by biting his fist.
'Geralt,' The fuzzy, shaky shadow of the surgeon came near him and immediately cut the ropes.
'You need to get yourself past the guards.
Follow the brightest star of the Seven Goats to the east.
Straight to the Ina.
Milva is waiting there with horses.' 'Help me get up...' He stood up on one leg, then the second, biting his fist.
Dandelion's circulation had had time to return to normal.
The witcher, after a moment, was also ready.
'How do we get out?' the poet suddenly asked.
'The guards at the door are snoring, but they...' 'They won't' interrupted Regis in a whisper.
'But be careful leaving.
The moon is full and there is lots of light from the campfires.
Although it is night time, there is still a lot of traffic in the camp, but this is good.
The patrol has already grown tired of asking for the password.
Go.
Good luck.' 'And you?' 'Do not worry about me.
Don't wait for me or look back.' 'But...' 'Dandelion,' the witcher hissed.
'He said not to worry about him, didn't you hear?' 'Go,' repeated Regis.
'Good luck.
Goodbye Geralt.' The witcher turned.
'Thank you for your help,' he said.
'But it is better that we never met again.
Do you understand me?' 'Perfectly.
Do not waste time.' The guard slept in picturesque poses, snoring and muttering.
None of them stirred when Geralt and Dandelion slipped through the open door.
None of them reacted when the witcher unceremoniously pulled off two heavy homespun cloaks.
'This is no mere sleep,' Dandelion whispered.
'Of course not,' Geralt, hidden in the darkness of the shed, looked around the square.
'I understand,' the poet sighed.
'Regis is a sorcerer?' 'No.
Not a sorcerer.' 'He pulled the horseshoe from the fire.
He lulled the guards to sleep...' 'Stop talking and concentrate.
We are not safe yet.
Put on the cloak and head through the square.
If anyone stops us, we pretend we are soldiers.' 'Okay.
If anything happens, I'll say...' 'We pretend we are stupid soldiers.
Let's go.' They cut across the yard, keeping away from the soldiers gathered around the wagons and campfires.
People wandered back and forth across the square, two more, did not attract any more attention.
No one's suspicions were aroused, no one hailed nor tried to stop them, They quickly and without hassle made their way towards the palisade.
Everything was going smoothly, a little too smoothly.
Geralt became restless, because he instinctively sensed danger and this feeling, as they moved further away from the center of the camp, grew instead of declining.
He kept repeating to himself that there was nothing surprising about any of this –in the middle of a busy night two people wouldn't be noticed, they could only be threatened if someone raised the alarm after finding the guards sleeping at the woodshed.
Now, however, they approaching the perimeter where sentries necessarily had to be vigilant.
It was while leaving the camp that the witcher remembered that there was in Vissegerd's command the scourge of desertion and he was sure that the guards were ordered to give careful attention to any who wished to leave the camp.
The moon gave enough light so that Dandelion did not have to grope.
The witcher could see in this light as well as in the day, so they managed to avoid two mounted soldiers while waiting in the bushes for the patrol to pass by.
Just before them was a dark alder grove lying just on the other side of the ring of posts.
Everything was going smoothly.
Too smoothly.
He had forgotten his knowledge of military procedure.
The low and sinister grove of alders was tempting because it would allow them to hide.
But since the world began, soldiers, when they came to perform their guard duties lay down among bushes, so they could sleep in shifts and also see the enemy as well as monitor their own annoying officers in case they passed by during an unexpected inspection.
Geralt and Dandelion had barely approached the alder woods when dark silhouettes appeared in front of them.
And a sharpened spears.
'The password!' 'Cintra!' Dandelion blurred without hesitation.
The soldiers laughed in chorus.
'Oh, men, men,' said one.
'You do not have a touch of fantasy.
You can't come up with something more original.
Nothing just, "Cintra".
Are you becoming homesick, or what? Okay.
The price is the same as yesterday.' Dandelion clenched his teeth audibly.
Geralt had a chance to assess the situation.
But the assessment yielded a poor result.
'Come,' urged the soldier.
'You want to leave, pay the toll and we'll turn a blind eye.
Quickly, the patrol will pass soon.' 'Right,' the poet changed his accent.
'I need to sit down and take off my shoe because I have...' He did not get a chance to say more.
Four soldiers threw him to the ground, two taking each of his legs and pulled off his boot.
The one, who asked for the password, ripped the inner lining of the boot.
Something jingled to the ground.
'Gold!' shouted a commander.
'Search the other one! And call the patrol!' No one was listening because all the men were on their knees.
Some were digging through leaves searching for the doubloons, others were dragging off Dandelion's other boot.
Now or never, thought Geralt, then punch the commander in the jaw as he fell he kicked him in the side of the head.
The men gathering gold did not even notice.
Dandelion without encouragement jumped to his feet and dashed off through the bushes.
Geralt ran after him.
'Help! Help!' shouted the captain of the guards who had been knocked down, now supported by his comrades.
'Paaaaaatrol!' 'Rogues!; Dandelion shouted as he ran.
'Thieves! They took my money!' 'Save your breath, idiot! Can you see the forest? Run!' 'Alarm! Alaaaaarm!' They ran.
Geralt cursed with rage when he heard cries, whistles and horses hooves.
Behind them.
And before them.
His surprise did not last long.
What he took to be the salvation of the forest, was an approaching cavalry, surging like a wave.
'Stop, Dandelion!' he shouted, then turning towards the oncoming patrol galloping towards them and whistled loudly with his fingers.
'Nilfgaard!' he roared, with all the power of his lungs.
'Nilfgaard is coming! To the camp! Return to the camp, fools! Raise the alarm! Nilfgaard!' The rider leading the patrol chasing them, looked forward, he shouted in fright and tried to turn his horse around.
But Geralt decided that he had had enough of the Cintra's lions and Temeria's lilies.
He jumped up and skilfully knocked the soldier from his saddle.
'Get on, Dandelion! And hold on!' The poet did not have to be told twice.
The horse paused for a moment under the weight of a second rider, but fuelled by two pairs of heels, went into a mad gallop.
The swarm of Nilfgaardians approaching them was now a much greater threat that Vissegerd and his army, so they galloped along the ring of guard posts surrounding the camp, trying to get as far possible from the lines that could flare up at any moment when the two armies clashed.
The Nilfgaardians, however, were close and saw them.
Dandelion yelled, Geralt looked back and saw as the dark wall of Nilfgaardians started to stretch out riders towards them like black tentacles.
Without hesitation, they turned the horse towards the camp, overtaking the fleeing guards.
Dandelion yelled again, but this time it was unnecessary.
The witcher had also seen the cavalry rushing from the side of the camp.
Vissegerd's army, stirred by the alarm, had mounted their horses in a time worthy of admiration.
Geralt and Dandelion found themselves trapped.
There was no way out.
The witcher changed direction again and forced the horse to gallop with all its might, trying to escape from the swiftly narrowing gap between the rock and the hard place.
When it seemed like they would succeed in escape, the night air was suddenly filled with the sound of whistling arrows.
Dandelion yelled, this time in pain and dug his fingers into Geralt's ribs.
The witcher felt something warm splatter on his neck.
'Hold on!' he caught the poet's arm and pressed him hard against his back.
'Hold on, Dandelion!' 'They've killed me!' the poet yelled, a little too loud for the dead.
'I'm bleeding! I'm dying!' 'Hold on!' The hail of arrows and bolts, which buried the two armies and which had proved so fatal for Dandelion, had also become a his salvation.
The armies, coming under fire, had lost their momentum and the gap between them provide some breathing room, enough to get both riders and the horse out of the trap.
Geralt mercilessly forced the stallion to galloping further, because although it loomed before them they could still hear the rumble of hooves from behind.
The horse grunted, stumbled, but they might have kept running and escaped had Dandelion not groaned and suddenly slipped from the rump of the horse, pulling the witcher from the saddle.
Geralt unintentionally pulled on the reins, the horse reared up and they were both tossed to the ground landing in a bush.
The poet fell limply and did not get up, just screamed wrenchingly.
He had the whole side of his head and his left shoulder covered in blood, shining black in the moonlight.
Behind them, the armies collided with a crash, clang and screams.
But despite the return of the battle, the Nilfgaardian pursuers had not forgotten about them.
Three horsemen galloped in their direction.
The witcher stood up, a feeling of cold rage welling inside of him.
He jumped in front of the pursuers, trying to divert their attention from the unconscious Dandelion.
He did not want to sacrifice himself for his friend.
He wanted to kill.
The first rider, flew at him with an axe, But he did not expect that he was going up against a witcher.
Geralt, without effort, sprang away from the blow, grabbed the saddle in one hand and with the other grabbed the wide belt of the Nilfgaardian.
With a strong jerk he pulled him from the saddle and fell on him.
Only then realizing he had no weapon.
He grabbed the man by the throat, but could not strangle him due to an iron gorget.
The nilfgaardian struggled under him then hit him with an iron gauntlet, tearing his cheek.
The witcher rolled his whole body and felt a dagger on the belt of the Nilfgaardian and pulled it from its sheath.
The fallen man noticed and started screaming.
Geralt pushed down the arm with the white scorpion on the sleeve and raised the dagger to strike.
The Nilfgaardian screamed.
The witcher stabbed him in the open mouth, all the way to the hilt.
When he rose, he saw the horses without riders, several corpses and a group returning to the battle.
The Cintrans from the camp had followed the Nilfgaardian pursers and in the darkness had not seen the poet or the two men fighting on the ground.
'Dandelion? Where did you get hit? Where is the arrow?' 'In the ca...
head...
Nailed in the head...' 'Don't talk nonsense! Damn, you were lucky,,, It's only a scratch...' 'I'm bleeding...' Geralt took off his jacket and tore off a sleeve.
The tip of the arrow had scratched Dandelion's ear, leaving a cut that reached to his temple.
The poet, every now and again touched the wound with his shaking hands, and then looked at the blood covering his hands and sleeves.
His eyes were lost.
The witcher realized that before him was a man who, for the first time had felt real pain and for the first time in his life seen so much of his own blood.
'Get up,' he said, quickly tying the sleeve around the troubadour's head.
'It's nothing.
Dandelion, it's just a scratch...
Get up, we need to be on our way...' The night battle raging on the prairie was at its height, the clang of iron, the neighing of the horses and the cries all gathered strength.
Geralt quickly grabbed two of the Nilfgaardians horses, but they only needed one.
Dandelion stood up, but immediately sat down heavily, groaned and sobbed wretchedly.
The witcher picked him up, shook him until he came around and helped him climb into the saddle.
Then he climbed on the back and spurred the horse.
They headed east, where in the brightening sky, shone the brightest star of the constellation of the Seven Goats.
*** 'Dawn will be here soon,' Milva said not looking at the sky but at the glossy surface of the river.
'The catfish chase the salmon.
But there is no sign of the witcher or Dandelion.
Shit, I hope that Regis knew what he was doing...' 'Do not lose hope,' Cahir murmured, as he rearranged the saddle on his recovered chestnut stallion.
'Pah...
I wonder...
Come into contact with Ciri, is like putting your head under an axe...
The girl brings misfortune...
Misery and death.' 'Stop, Milva.' 'Pah...
I'm cold...
and I want a drink, but at the edge of the river I saw a rotting corpse.
Brr...
I feel sick...
I want to vomit.' 'Here,' Cahir passed her a canteen.
'Have a drink.
I will sit close to you and warm you.' More catfish hit the shallows, the group coming close to the surface in a shower of silver.
'Who knows,' murmured Milva thoughtfully, pressing close to Cahir's arm, 'what will happen tomorrow? Who will cross this river and who will occupy this territory?' 'What will be, will be.
Banish these thoughts.' 'Are you not afraid?' 'I'm scared.
And you?' 'I feel sick.' They were silent for a long time.
'Tell me, Cahir, when did you meet Ciri?' 'For the first time? Three years ago.
During the battle of Cintra.
While I was leaving the city.
I found her, surrounded by fire on all sides.
I rode through the fire, through the flames and the smoke, holding her in my arms and she too was like fire.' 'How so?' 'No one can hold fire in their hands.' 'If Ciri is not in Nilfgaard,' she said after a long silence, 'then where?' 'I do not know.' *** Drakenborg, a Redanian castle converted in a concentration camp for elves, and other subversive elements had a grim tradition, developed over three years of operation.
One of these traditions was the hangings at dawn.
The second tradition was gathering all the condemned together in a great common cell, where they were taken out to the gallows at dawn.
The convicts are grouped into cells from ten to twenty, and every morning two, three or four are hanged.
The other wait for their turn.
Sometimes for a long while.
Sometimes within a week.
Those waiting in the cells are called the Joyful.
Because the atmosphere surrounding the cell was always cheerful.
First, the captives were given food and heavily diluted sour wine, bearing the camp jargon name: "Dijkstra Riesling", since it was no secret that the drink was served on the personal orders of the Redanian intelligence chief.
Secondly, anyone in the condemned cell could not be dragged off into the notorious underground laundries and the guards were not allowed to mistreat the prisoners.
That night another tradition was being performed.
In a cell occupied by six elves, one half-elf, one halfling, two humans and a Nilfgaardian, there was joy.
The Dijkstra Riesling was being poured into a tin plate and sipped without hands, in order to have better chances of getting a slight dizziness from the watered down wine.
Only one of the elves, a Scoia'tael from Iorveth's commandos had recently received a heavy beating in the laundry room, he kept his serenity and dignity, and wrote on a wall beam the inscription: "Freedom or death".
There were hundreds of similar inscriptions.
The rest of the condemned, also following tradition, sang in chorus the hymn of the Joyful, an anonymous song, composed in Drakenborg, whose words were learned by each of the prisoners in the barracks at night by listening to the sounds coming from the death cell, knowing that someday they would join in the chorus.
The hanged people dance on the ropes, Rhythmically writhing in spasms, Sing your song, With melancholic emotion, Too amuse the Joyful, Each of the dead remember when their feet left the stool, And their eyes popped out of their sockets.
The lock screeched and the door groaned.
The Joyful interrupted their song.
Guards entering at dawn could only mean one thing – the chorus would be slimmed down a couple of voices.
The question was: whose? The guards came in a group.
They carried ropes that were to be used to tie the hands of those being led to the gallows.
One sniffed, put his club under his arm, unrolled a scroll and cleared his throat.
'Echel Trogelton!' 'Traighlethan,' corrected the elf from Iorveth's commandos.
He looked again at the slogan he had written and rose with effort.
'Cosmo Baldenyegg!' The halfling swallowed hard.
Nazairian knew he had been imprisoned on charges of sabotage, carried out on behalf of the Secret Service of Nilfgaard.
Baldenyegg, however, pleaded not guilty and insisted that he had stolen the two cavalry horses on his own initiative and for profit and had nothing to do with Nilfgaard.
They apparently had not believed him.
'Nazairian!' Nazairian obediently stood up and gave his hands to the guards to be tied.
When they lead the trio away, the other Joyful continued singing.
Dance on the hanging ropes, Happily writhe in spasms, And the wind carries their songs, The ringing chorus all around... The dawn was shining purple and red.
It promised to be a beautiful, sunny day.
The song of the Joyful, Nazairian noticed, was incorrect.
The hanged men could not dance on the gallows, because they were not hung on gallows but on ordinary poles, dug into the ground.
Foot stools were not used, but practical birch stumps, bearing the marks of frequent use.
At the end of the day, the anonymous author of the song, who had been execute, could not have known about it when it was composed.
Like all the hanged, he learned the details shortly before his death.
The executions in Drakenborg were never performed in public.
This was punishment, not sadistic revenge.
These words were also attributed to Dijkstra.
The elf from Iorveth's command shook of the hands of the guards, climbed onto the stump and allowed them to place the rope around his neck.
'Long live the...' A guard kicked the stump out from under his feet.
For the halfling, it took two logs one placed on top of another.
The alleged saboteur climbed up with no pathetic cries.
His short legs kicked vigorously then hung limp from the pole.
His head fell limp onto his shoulder.
The guards grabbed Nazairian, and Nazairian suddenly decided.
'I'll speak!' he shouted hoarsely.
'I'll confess! I have important information for Dijkstra!' 'A little late,' said Vascoigne, the deputy commander of Drakenborg for political affairs, who was present at the executions.
'In one of every two of you, the rope awakens the imagination!' 'I'm not making this up!' Nazairian broke loose from the arms of the executioners.
'I have information!' After less than an hour, Nazairian was sitting in a windowless dungeon and delighted at the beauty of life, a messenger was ready at hand and scratched his crotch with passion, while Vascoigne read and correct the report intended for Dijkstra.
With humility I announce to Your Grace, a criminal by the name of Nazairian, condemned for the attack on a royal official, has confessed the following: Acting on the orders of a certain Rience, on the new moon of this year in July, along with two partners, the half-elf Schirru and the human Millet, took part in the murder of lawyers Codringher and Fenn in Dorian.
The half-elf Schirru, assassinated both lawyers and set fire to their house.
The criminal Nazairian, says that Schirru did everything and denies that he killed anyone, probably from fear of the noose.
What you may be interested in Your Grace is: before they committed the crime on the lawyers these villains, that is, Nazairian, the half-elf Schirru and the human Millet, were following a witcher, a man named Geralt of Rivia, who met with the lawyer Codringher in secret.
The subject of the meeting, the criminal Nazairian does not know, because before he could question them, they received an order from Rience to murder the two lawyers once he learned of the secret meeting with the witcher.
Next the criminal Nazairian testified: His partner Schirru stole documentation from the house which he delivered to Rience at "The Sly Fox" inn in Carreras.
What Rience and Schirru talked about, Nazairian does not know, but the next day all of the criminal trio went to Brugge, and there on the fourth day after the new moon committed a kidnapping of a young girl from a red brick house, whose door had brass scissors nailed to it.
Rience the forced the young girl to drink a magic elixir and the criminals Schirru and Nazairian with great haste took her to Verden, to the fortress of Nastrog.
And now follows the one thing I recommend you read with great attention Your Grace: The miscreants who snatched the girl and delivered to the Nilfgaardian commander of the fortress, assured him that the kidnapped girl's name was Cirilla of Cintra.
The commander, so criminal Nazairian confessed, was very excited on hearing the news.
The above, written on a message is issued to His Excellency in secret.
As protocol demands I have sent along the detailed questioning of the criminal.
I ask Your Grace for instructions on what to do with the criminal Nazairian, Whether to burn him with the tongs to remember more details or hang him under the original orders.
Yours Respectfully, etc, etc... Vascoigne sweepingly signed the report, then stamped it and called the messenger.
The contents of the report were known to Dijkstra the same evening.
Philippa Eilhart knew the next day at noon.
*** When the horse carrying the witcher and Dandelion emerged from the alders, Milva and Cahir were very nervous.
They had recently been hearing the sounds of battle carried along the waters of the Ina.
While helping lower the port from the saddle, Milva saw Geralt tense at the sight of the Nilfgaardian.
She did not get to say a word to the witcher, as Dandelion moaned desperately and slid through her hands.
They laid him in the sand, putting a coat under his head wound.
Milva was about to remove the blood soaked bandages when she felt a hand on her shoulder and smelled the familiar scent of wormwood, anise and other herbs.
Regis, as was his custom, appeared out of nowhere and no one knew how.
'Allow me,' he said, pulling utensils and medical instruments from his cavernous bag.
'I'll take care of him.' When the surgeon removed the bandages from the wound, Dandelion moaned in pain.
'Easy,' Regis said, washing the wound.
'This is nothing.
Just a little blood.
Just a little blood... Your blood smells good, poet.' Just then the witcher behaved in a way that Milva did not expect.
He went to the hose and pulled from a sheath under the saddle a long sword.
'Get away from him,' he snapped, standing next to the surgeon.
'The blood smells good,' Regis repeated without looking at the witcher, 'I do not smell an infection, which in the case of a wound in the head could be fatal.
The arteries and veins have not been affected... Now I need to cut you.' Dandelion wailed and gasped violently.
The sword in the witcher's hand quivered, the light reflecting from the river flashed across its surface.
'I will give you a few stitches,' Regis said, still not paying any attention to the witcher or his sword.
'Be brave, Dandelion.' Dandelion was courageous.
'I'm finished,' Regis finished his treatment.
'Between now and the wedding, as they say, you'll heal.
A wound is perfect for a poet, Dandelion.
You will walk as a war hero with a big bandage on his head and the heart of the girls who look at you will melt like wax.
Yes, truly a poetic wound.
Not like an arrow in the belly.
The liver destroyed, the kidneys and intestines cut up, faeces spilling out, infection of the peritoneum... Well, you're done.
Geralt, I'm at your disposal.' He stood up and the witcher placed his sword on his neck.
With a movement that was too fast for the eye to follow.
'Step back,' Geralt growled at Milva.
Regis did not tremble even though the sword was gently resting on the skin of his neck.
The archer gasped when she saw how the surgeon's eyes gleamed in the darkness, with a cat's light.
'Well, go on,' Regis said calmly.
'Push.' 'Geralt,' Dandelion moaned from the floor, fully conscious, 'Are you crazy? He saved us from the gallows... He healed my head...' 'He saved us and that girl in the camp.' Milva gently reminded him.
'Be silent.
You do not know who he is.' The surgeon did not move.
Milva suddenly saw with horror what she should have seen long ago.
Regis did not cast a shadow.
'True,' he said slowly.
'You do not know who I am.
And it is time for you to know.
My name is Emiel Regis Rohellec Terzieff-Godefroy.
I have lived in this world for four hundred and twenty-eight years according to you humans, six hundred and forty-two years according to the calculations of the elves.
I am a descendant of the survivors, hapless creatures trapped among you after the disaster, which you call the Conjunction of the Spheres.
I am considered, to put it mildly, a monster.
A horrible bloodsucker.
And now I have stumbled upon a witcher, a professional whose job it is to eliminate those like me.
That's all.' 'That's enough,' Geralt lowered his sword.
'Get up.
Get out of here, Emiel Regis and who knows what else.
Goodbye.' 'Unbelievable,' Regis taunted.
'Will you let me go? Me, who is a threat to humans? The witcher should take every opportunity to eliminate such hazards.' 'Get up.
Go away, quickly.' 'And what faraway place shall I go?' Regis asked slowly.
'In the end, you are a witcher.
You know about me.
When you have dealt with your problem now, when you have settled what you have to do, you will surely return here.
You know where I live, where I'm going, what I do.
You will track me down to?' 'I cannot exclude it.
If there is a reward.
I am a witcher.' 'I wish you luck.' Regis tied his bag and unrolled his cloak.
'Goodbye.
Ah, one more thing.
How high would the reward be on my head for you to trouble yourself with me? How much am I worth?' 'Bloody high.' 'Indulge my vanity.
How much exactly?' 'Fuck off, Regis.' 'Of course.
But before that, my valuation, please.' 'An ordinary vampire I would look at the equivalent of a good horse and saddle.
But you are no ordinary vampire.' 'How much?' 'I doubt,' The witcher's voice was cold as ice.
'I doubt anyone could afford it.' 'I understand and thank you,' the vampire smiled, this time revealing his teeth.
At the sight of them, Milva and Cahir drew back, and Dandelion stifled a scream of terror.
'Farewell and good luck.' 'Goodbye, Regis.
Same to you.' Emiel Regis Rohellec Terzieff-Godefroy snapped his cloak, wrapped it around himself and disappeared.
Simply disappeared.
'Now,' Geralt turned naked sword still in his hand, 'it's your turn, Nilfgaardian...' 'No,' Milva interrupted angrily.
'I've had enough.
Get the horses, and let's get out of here! Sounds carry down the river, before we know it we'll have enemies on our neck.' 'I will not go with him.' 'Then go alone!' She shouted angrily, in earnest.
'In another direction! I have had enough of your moods, witcher! Regis was expelled, even though he saved your lives, but that's your business.
But Cahir saved my life.
But if we are your enemies, then go back to Armeria.
Your friends are waiting there with a noose!' 'Don't shout.' 'So don't stand there like a post.
Help me get Dandelion on the gelding.' 'You saved our horses? Roach as well?' 'He saved them,' she nodded at Cahir.
'We're going.' *** They crossed over the Ina.
They rode along the right bank, alongside the river, through shallow backwaters and old river beds overrun with willows, through meadows and wetlands reverberating with the croaking of frogs, the cries of invisible ducks and cicadas.
The day broke with a red sun, which shone blindingly off of the water lily covered lakes; they turned towards the spot where one of the many branches of the Ina flowed into the Yaruga.
The now rode through the dark gloomy forests, where the trees grew directly from the duckweed from the green marshes.
Milva rode at the head, next to the witcher, all the while telling him in a low voice of her story of Cahir.
Geralt was silent as a mute; he never once looked back, never once laid eyes on the Nilfgaardian, whose was bringing up the rear, helping the troubadour.
Dandelion moaned and cursed, complaining of a headache, but held up bravely and did not inhibit the procession.
The recovery of Pegasus and the lute strapped to his saddle had significantly improved his mood.
At around noon they came back to a sunny meadow behind which they could see the wide floodplain of the Great Yaruga.
They crossed the old riverbed, across sandbars and shoals.
And they came to an island, a dry place between the swamps and thickets surrounded by numerous branches of the river.
The island was full of bushes and covered in reeds, trees also grew there, bare, dry and covered in white droppings of cormorants.
Milva was the first to see the boat among the reeds which must have been brought there by the current.
She spotted a clearing among the willows, suitable for a pasture for the horses.
They stopped and the witcher decided it was about time to talk to the Nilfgaardian.
In private.
*** 'I gave you your life at Thanedd.
I felt sorry for you, kid.
That was the biggest mistake of my life.
This morning I let a higher vampire get away from my sword, who surely has on his conscience many human lives.
I should have killed him.
I am only interested in one thing: to get at the skins of those who have hurt Ciri.
I vowed to myself that those who have hurt her will pay for it with their blood.' Cahir remained silent.
'Your revelation, which Milva told me about, does not change anything.
They only show one thing: At Thanedd you had not managed to kidnap Ciri, although you tried hard.
So now you trail behind me, hoping that I will lead you to her again.
So you can put your claws in her and take her back to your Emperor and hope that he forgives you and doesn't send you to the gallows.' Cahir remained silent.
Geralt felt bad.
Very bad.
'Because of you she would wake screaming in the night.
To her childish eyes you became a nightmare.
And yet, you were only a tool, just a poor lackey of your emperor.
I don't know what you have done to become a nightmare to her.
The worst thing is, I do not understand why, despite everything I can not kill you.
I do not understand what stops me.' 'It may be,' Cahir said quietly, 'that against all appearances, we have something in common, you and me? 'I wonder what' 'Like you, I want to save Ciri.
Like you, I do not care if this is odd and surprises people.
Like you, I have no intention of telling anyone my reasons.' 'Is that all?' 'No.' 'I'm listening.' 'Ciri,' the Nilfgaardian started slowly, 'is on horseback riding through a dusty village, with six young people.
Among these people is a girl with short-cut hair.
Ciri dances in a shed on a table and is happy...' 'Milva told you my dreams.' 'No.
She did not tell me anything.
You do not believe me?' 'No.' Cahir bowed his head and a scuffed his heel in the sand.
'I forgot,' he said, 'that you cannot believe m, you don't have to trust me.
I understand that.
But you dreamed, like me, this dream.
A dream that you have not told anyone.
Because I doubt that you would want to tell anyone.' *** You could say that Servadio was simply lucky.
He came to Loredo with no intention of spying on anyone in particular.
But the village was not called the Bandit's Lair for no reason.
Loredo lay along the bandit trail, brigands and thieves from all along the upper Velda area, met here to sell or exchange their spoils, get supplies, rest and play in the company of bandits.
The village had been burned several times, but a few of the permanent inhabitants and numerous newcomers continued to rebuild it.
They lived off of the bandits, and also lived comfortably.
So the spies and informers like Servadio always had the possibility of obtaining some information in Loredo that was worth a few florens from the Prefect.
Now Servadio was counting on more than a few.
Because entering the village, were the Rats.
Giselher led, flanked by Spark and Kayleigh.
Behind them rose Mistle and this new girl, called Falka, Reef and Asse closed the procession, leading spare horses, likely stolen and had to be sold here.
They were tired and dusty, but they kept straight in their saddles, responding enthusiastically to the greetings of comrades and acquaintances that were staying in Loredo.
They sprang from their horses, were offered beer, and immediately proceeded to negotiate with noisy traders and buyers of stolen goods.
All but Mistle and the new gray-haired girl, wearing a sword strapped across her back.
These two went among the stalls that as usual, filled the square.
Loredo had it market days, when the goods from the bandits were particularly rich and diverse.
Today was such a day.
Servadio carefully followed the girls.
To make money, he had to gain information and to gain information he had to listen.
The girls examined the colourful scarves, corals, as well as embroidered blouses, Saddle bags, and ordinate trappings for horses.
They looked at the goods, but did not buy anything.
Almost the whole time, Mistle held the hand of the gray-haired girl.
The spy cautiously moved closer, pretending to examine straps and belts at a saddlers stall.
The girls talked, but quietly, he could not catch any of the word, but was afraid to move any closer.
If might note him and become suspicious.
One of the stalls was selling cotton candy.
The young girls approached it.
Mistle bought two stick wrapped in snowy sweetness and gave one to the gray-haired girl.
She delicately nibbled.
The white flacks stuck to her lips.
Mistle wiped them off with gentle movements and careful treatment.
The gray-haired ones emerald eyes widened, she slowly licked her lips, smiled and shook her head mockingly.
Servadio felt a chill, a cold stream of sweat ran down his neck between his shoulder blades.
He recalled the rumours circulation about the two bandits.
He was intended to withdraw in secret, it was clear that he would not be able to hear or learn anything.
The girls were not talking about anything important, while not far away, where the elders of the gang gathered, Giselher, Kayleigh and the others argued noisily, bargained, shouted, again and again putting their cups under the tap of the keg.
With them, Servadio was more likely to learn something important.
Any of the Rats could shed a word, or even a sentence, that could betray future plans of the gang, their routes or destinations.
If he could hear something and transmit the news in time to the soldiers of the Prefect or Nilfgaardian agents, who were keenly interested in the Rats, the reward would be practically in his pocket.
And if on the basis of the information the Prefect managed to organise a successful ambush, Servadio could count on a substantial influx of cash.
I'll buy my wife a coat, he thought feverishly, I can finally buy the children some shoes and toys...
And I...
The girls were walking along the stalls, licking and nibbling sticks of cotton candy.
Servadio suddenly realized that they were being watched.
And having fingers pointed at them.
He knew that the pointing fingers belonged to thieves and cattle rustlers of the Pinto gang.
The thieves yelled several obscene remarks and laughed defiantly.
Mistle narrowed her eyes and put her hand on shoulder of the gray-haired girl.
'Come on sister!' bellowed one of the thieves with a moustache that looked like a bunch of tow.
'Come closer and give us a kiss!' Servadio saw the gray-haired one trembling and saw Mistle tighten her fingers on her shoulder.
The thieves laughed in chorus.
Mistle turned slowly; some of them stopped laughing immediately.
But the one with the moustache was too drunk or completely devoid of sense.
'Do any of you wretched sluts need a man?' He walked closer performing disgusting and unambiguous gestures, 'Believe me, the best thing to do is to have a good fuck and in a flash those perversion are gone.
Hey! I'm talking to you...' He never managed to touch them.
The girl with the gray hair struck like a snake on the attack, her sword had been drawn and struck before the cotton candy had hit the floor.
The thief with the moustache staggered about, blood spurting from the cut in his neck in a long stream.
The girl reached out again caught up in the two-step dance, struck again, a wave of blood splattered the stalls, the body fell to the floor, the sand around him turned red immediately.
Someone screamed.
The second thief bent down and drew a knife from his boot, but at the same time was felled by Giselher with the blunt shaft of a lance.
'One corpse is enough!' the leader of the Rats shouted.
'This man alone is to blame, he did not know who he messed with! Back off, Falka!' The gray haired one finally lowered her sword.
Giselher raised a purse and shook it.
'According to the laws of our brotherhood, I will pay for the dead.
Honestly, by weight, A thaler for each pound of his disgusting body.
And that is the end of the row! Am I right, comrades? Hey, Pinto, what do you say?' Spark, Kayleigh, Asse and Reef stood behind their leader.
Their faces were like stone and their hands were on the hilts of their swords.
'Honestly,' said one of the bandits of the Pinto, a short man with bowed legs wearing a leather jacket.
'You speak truly, Giselher.
End of row.' Servadio swallowed hard, trying to melt into the crowd surrounding the incident.
Suddenly he felt no desire to walk around near the Rats or near the girl with the ash coloured hair, called Falka.
He suddenly realized that the reward offered by the Prefect was not as high as he thought.
Falka quietly slid the sword into its sheath while looking around.
Servadio was amazed when he saw her tiny face suddenly change.
'My cotton candy,' cried the girl, looking at the candy lying in the sand.
'I dropped my cotton candy...' Mistle hugged her.
'I'll buy you another.' *** The Witcher was sitting on the sand among the reeds, sullen, angry and pensive.
He watched the cormorants sitting withered in a tree.
Cahir, after the talk, disappeared into the bushes and did not come back.
Milva and Dandelion were looking for something to eat.
Inside the boat they had found under the seats a copper saucepan and a basket of vegetables.
They made a trap out of wicker found in the boat and waded around the shore with sticks beating the seaweed, trying to propel the fish into the trap.
The poet was feeling better already and walked with his head bandaged heroically, proud as a peacock.
The Witcher was thoughtful and angry.
Dandelion and Milva pulled the wicker trap from the water and started to curse, because instead of carp, they had caught little fish among the weeds.
The Witcher stood.
'Come here you two! Leave the casket and come here.
I have something to say.' 'Go home,' he began bluntly when they came over wet and reeking of fish.
'To the north, towards Mahakam.
I will continue alone.' 'What?' 'Our paths diverge, Dandelion.
Enough of these games.
Go home and write songs.
Milva will lead you through the woods...
What is it?' 'Nothing.' Milva brushed her hair from her shoulders.
'Nothing.
Speak, witcher.
I want to know what else you have to say.' 'I have nothing else to say.
I'm going south, to the other side of the Yaruga.
Through Nilfgaardian territory.
It is dangerous and a long way.
And I cannot wait.
So I'm going alone.' 'Having disposed of cumbersome baggage,' Dandelion nodded.' The ball and chain hindering your march.
In other words, me.' 'And me,' Milva added, looking away.
'Listen,' said Geralt, much calmer now.
'This is a personal matter.
It does not concern you.
I do not want to risk your necks for something that only concerns me.' 'This concerns only you,' Dandelion repeated slowly.
'Nobody is needed or desired.
Our company bothers you and slows down the march.
You do not expect help from anyone and have no intentions of worrying about anyone.
In addition, you like solitude.
Have I forgotten to mention something?' 'Yes,' Geralt said angrily.
'You forgot to replace your empty head with one that contains a brain.
If that arrow had gone to the right, you idiot, crows would now be eating your eyes.
You're a poet; you have imagination, try to imagine that image.
I repeat, go back north, I'm going to other way.
Alone.' 'I'm going,' Milva rose resiliently.
'Do you think that would ask you? To the devil with you, Witcher.
Come on, Dandelion, let's go find some food.
I'm hungry and listening to this drivel has made me feel sick.' Geralt turned his head.
He watched a green-eyed cormorant drying it's wings on a tree branch covered in guano.
Suddenly he smelt the sharp scent of herbs and sword furiously.
'You abuse my patience, Regis.' The vampire, who appeared from out of nowhere, was unmoved and came and sat next to the witcher.
'I have to change the poet's dressings.' He said calmly.
'Then go to him.
But stay away from me.' Regis sighed, with no intention of leaving.
'I heard you conversation just now with Dandelion and the archer.' He said without mockery in his voice.
'I must admit you have a real talent with winning people over.
While the whole world stands against you, you pass up your allies and companions who are willing to help.' 'The world stands on its head.
A vampire is teaching me how to deal with people.
What do you know about people, Regis? The only thing you know is the taste of blood.
Damn it, why did I have to start talking to you?' 'The world stands on its head,' confessed the vampire, quite seriously.
'You've started.
So you may therefore want to listen to my advice?' 'No.
I do not.
I do not need your advice.' 'True, I'd almost forgotten.
You do not need advice, you do not need allies or companions.
The objective of your journey is after all a personal and private objective, the nature of which requires you to complete it alone, personally.
The risks, danger, troubles and struggles with doubt should only affect you and no one else.
Because they are, in the end, elements of your penance, your redemption, of the guilt that you are trying to alleviate.
A certain, as they say, baptism of fire.
Through the fire, that burns, but also purifies.
Solo, alone.
Because if you accept someone's support, their help, then they take upon themselves a bit of the baptism of fire, that pain, that penance and it would lessen it for you.
So you deprive them of participating in that part of the atonement that is exclusively your atonement.
It is only you who has to pay off this debt and you do not want to pay this debt at the same time with other creditors.
Do I understand the logic?' 'You're presence irritates me vampire.
Leave me alone with my atonement.
And with my debts.' 'As you wish,' Regis stood.
'Sit, think.
But I'll give you advice anyway.
The need for atonement, a baptism of fire, guilt, these are things to which you can claim an exclusive right.
Life is different from banking; it allows debts to be repaid by the debt of others.' 'Go, please.' 'As you wish.' The vampire left and joined Dandelion and Milva.
While changing the bandages, the trio discussed what there was to eat.
Milva looked in to wicker basket at the small fish.
'There is no need to meditate,' she said.
'We can stuff these little fish onto sticks and roast them over a fire.' 'No.' Dandelion said shaking his bandaged head.
'Not a good idea.
The fish are too small, there aren't enough of them.
I suggest we prepare them in a soup.' 'Fish soup?' 'Sure.
We have a bunch of these little things, we have salt.' Dandelion counted them off on his fingers to further illustrate his point.
'We have found onions, carrots, parsley and celery, and the cauldron.
After summing all this up, we get soup.' 'We could use some spices.' 'Oh,' Regis smiled reaching into his bag.
'This will not be a problem.
I have basil, paprika, pepper, bay leaves, sage...' 'Enough, enough,' Dandelion stopped him.
'Just no mandrake in the soup it isn't required.
To work.
You clean the fish, Milva.' 'You clean them! Do you think just because there is a female in the company, she will toil in the kitchen! I will bring water and start a fire.
And you can clean these loaches yourself.' 'These are not loaches,' Regis said.
'They are chub, roach and bream.' 'Ha,' Dandelion could not resist.
'I see you know about fish.' 'I know many things,' the vampire acknowledged modestly.
'I have studied here and there.' 'If you are such an expert,' Milva again blew on the fire, and then got up.
'You can expertly clean these fish.
I'll go a fetch some water.' 'Can you carry a full cauldron? Geralt, help her.' 'I can handle it,' Milva growled irritably.
'I can do without his help.
He deals with personal issues, I wouldn't dare disturb him!' Geralt turned his head, pretending not to hear.
Dandelion and the vampire had efficiently cleaned the fish.
'This will be a thin soup,' Dandelion said, hanging the cauldron over the fire.
'We could use some bigger fish.' 'Would this serve?' Cahir appeared from among the reeds, holding a three pound pike still waving its tail and its gills opening and closing.
'Aha! What a beauty! Where did you get it Nilfgaardian?' 'I'm not Nilfgaardian.
I come from Vicovaro and my name is Cahir...' 'Okay, okay, I know.
I asked, where did you get the pike?' 'I have made a fishing rod.
I used frogs as bait.
I cast it from the bank and the pike took it immediately.' 'Everyone's an expert.' Dandelion shook his bandaged head.
'It's a pity no one suggested steaks, he probably would have caught a cow.
But let's give thanks for what we have.
Regis, put all the small fish into the cauldron, with their heads and tails.
The pike, however, will need to be prepared well.
Can you, Nilf... Cahir?' 'I can.' 'Let's get to work.
Damn it, Geralt, how long are you going to sit there pretending to be offended? Peel the vegetables!' The Witcher got up obediently and moved closer, but sat conspicuously far from Cahir.
Before he could complain that he didn't have a knife, the Nilfgaardian – or the Vicorvarian, gave him his own, drawing a second one from his boot.
The Witcher accepted, mumbling his thanks.
Working together went smoothly.
The cauldron, full of little fish and vegetables started to boil.
The vampire stirred it with a spoon that Milva had carved from wood.
Once Cahir had cleaned and divided the pike, Dandelion through the tail and head into the cauldron and stirred thoroughly.
'Yum, yum, it smells good.
When everything is cooked lets strain the remains.' 'Unless you use your socks,' Milva raised her eyebrows, while carving another spoon, 'we don't have a strainer.' 'My dear, Milva,' Regis smiled.
'Of course we can! What we do not have, we can easily replace with what we have.
It is simply a matter of initiative and positive thinking.' 'To the devil with your learned chatter, vampire.' 'We can strain it threw my chainmail,' Cahir said.
'What remains in the armor we can then discard.' 'Make sure you wash it first,' Milva said.
'Otherwise, I won't eat this soup.' The filtration went smoothly.
'Now throw away the slops, Cahir,' Dandelion ordered.
'It smells good, yum, yum.
There is no need for more wood, Geralt! What are you doing with that spoon? I doesn't need more stirring!' 'Don't shout.
I didn't know.' 'Ignorance,' Regis smiled.
'Is not an excuse for thoughtless actions.
When one doesn't know or is in doubt, it is good to seek advice...' 'Shut up, Vampire!' Geralt stood up and turned his back.
Dandelion snorted.
'Look at him, you've offended him again.' 'Listen to him,' Milva said, her lip curling, 'he's such a charlatan.
If he doesn't know what to do he just talks and sulks.
Have you noticed that yet?' 'Long ago.' Cahir said quietly.
'Add pepper.' Dandelion said licking the spoon and chewing.
'And salt.
Ah, now it is ready.
Take it off the fire.
Damn, that's hot! I don't have gloves...' 'I have.' Cahir said.
'And I,' Regis said, grabbing the cauldron in his hands, 'do not need them.' 'Good,' the poet wiped the spoon on his pants.
'Come on, company, sit down.
Bon appetite! Geralt, are you waiting for a special invitation? Heralds and a fanfare?' Everyone sat around the pot that was placed on the sand and for a long time the only sounds were the loud sips interrupted by blowing on spoons.
After eating half of the soup they carefully stared catching pieces of pike, and finally drained the cauldron to the bottom.
'I say,' gasped Milva.
'That it was a silly thing to have soup, Dandelion.' 'Certainly,' Regis agreed.
'What do you say, Geralt?' 'I say – thank you.' The Witcher stood up with effort, rubbed his knee, which began to bite back with pain.
'Is that enough? Or do you need a fanfare?' 'It is always like that with him,' the troubadour waved his hand.
'Ignore him.
He was just lucky, I was with him when he was quarrelling with Yennefer, a pale beauty with raven hair.' 'Be more discreet,' the vampire reminded him.
'And do not forget, he has problems.' 'Problems,' Cahir stifled a belch, 'must be addressed.' 'True,' Dandelion said.
'But how?' Milva snorted and stretched out to make herself more comfortable on the warm sand.
'The vampire is a scholar.
He should be able to come up with something.' 'The key is not knowledge, but the ability to weigh all the pros and cons,' Regis said calmly.
'And when one considers the situation, we reach the conclusion that we are dealing with a problem that is unsolvable.
This entire project is devoid of opportunities for success.
The probability of finding Ciri is zero.' 'Oh yes,' Milva ridiculed 'Isn't this only a matter of initiative and positive thinking, as with the strainer.
If we don't have something, then we will replace it with something else.
So I thought.' 'Until recently,' the vampire continued, 'we thought Ciri was in Nilfgaard.
Getting there and rescuing her or stealing her seemed an impossible task.
Now, after Cahir's revelations, we don't even know where Ciri is.
It is difficult to speak of initiative when you have no idea what direction to go.' 'What shall we do then?' Milva pouted.
'The Witcher insists we move south...' 'For him,' Regis smiled, 'the cardinal points have no meaning.
He does not care which way we move, so long as he is not sitting doing nothing.
This is the purpose of a witcher.
The world is full of evil, so they go where their eyes lead them, and annihilate any evil along the way, in this way they serve Order.
The rest will follow.
In other words, movement is everything, the goal is nothing.' 'That's silly,' said Milva.
'His goal is Ciri.
Is she not important to him?' 'I joke,' admitted the vampire, watching Geralt with his back still turned.
'Without much tact.
Sorry.
Your right, dear Milva.
Our goal is Ciri.
And we don't know where she is, it makes sense to learn that and conveniently manage our activities.
The Child Surprise, I notice is bursting with magic and other supernatural predestination.
And I know someone who is very familiar with these issues who can certainly help us.' 'Ha,' exclaimed Dandelion.
'Who is it? Where do he find them? Far away?' 'Closer than the Nilfgaard capital.
Strictly speaking, quite close.
In Angren.
On this side of the Yaruga.
I speak of the circle of Druids, who are located in the forests of Caed Dhu.' 'Let us set off without delay!' 'Did any of you,' Geralt finally spoke, upset 'not consider it appropriate to ask me my opinion?' 'You?' Dandelion turned around.
'But you have no idea what to do.
Even the soup that you ate, you owe to us.
If not for us, you'd be hungry.
And us too, if we waited for you to act.
This soup was the work of cooperation.
The of the actions of a group working on a common goal.
Do you understand, friend?' 'How is he to understand?' Milva frowned.
'He prefers solitude.
The Lone Wolf! We can see that he is not a hunter who knows the forests.
Wolves never hunt alone! Never! The lone wolf is a silly tale told by town folk.
But he does not understand?' 'I understand, I understand,' Regis smiled according to his custom, with pursed lips.
'He just looks so silly,' Dandelion confirmed.
'But in time he will finally use his brain.
He may even draw a valid conclusion.
That the only activity that a man does alone is masturbation.' Cahir Mawr Dyffryn aep Ceallach remained tactfully silent.
'Let the plague take you all,' the Witcher said finally waving a spoon indignantly.
'May the devil take you, you idiots cooperating in your groups united by a common goal, which none of you understand.
And let the devil take me also.' This time they all followed the example of Cahir, and kept tactfully silent.
Dandelion, Maria Barring, called Milva and Emiel Regis Rohellec Terzieff-Godefroy.
'I've found a company!' Geralt continued shaking his head.
'Comrades in arms! A team of heroes! There is nothing to do but laugh.
One who makes verses with a lute.
A foul-mouthed female half wild, half dryad.
A four hundred year old vampire.
And a fucking Nilfgaardian who insists that he is not Nilfgaardian.' 'And leading them is a Witcher, sick with remorse, helplessness and an inability to make decisions.' Regis finished calmly.
'Indeed, I propose that we travel incognito, to avoid arousing sensation.' 'And laughter.' Milva added.
"The queen said: 'Don't plead for mercy, but beg those whom you harmed with your sorcery.
You had the courage to commit evil deeds, be brave now, when justice is near.
It is not in my power to pardon your sins.' The witch sniggered like a cat in response, her wicked eyes glimmered.
'My doom is near,' she shouted, 'but yours is not far either, my queen.
At the hour of your terrible death you will remember Lara Dorren and her curse.
And know that the curse will touch all your descendants over the next ten generations.' Yet, realizing that the queen was fearless at heart, the evil elven witch stopped swearing and threatening with curses, and began whining like a bitch, begging for mercy and help..." The tale of Lara Dorren, as told by humans.
"...but even pleas and invocations didn't soften the stone hearts of the dh'oine, the cruel and merciless humans.
And when Lara grabbed the carriage door, begging for mercy - not for herself, but for her child - the queen ordered a thug to swing his sword, cutting her fingers off.
The winter cold set in that night, and on a hill amidst woods, Lara drew her last breath while giving birth to her daughter, whom she protected with what warmth was left in her body.
And even though night, winter and blizzard were all around, springtime suddenly came to the hill and feainnewedd flowers bloomed.
To this day those flowers are found in only two places: the valley of Dol Blathanna and on the hill where Lara Dorren aep Shiadhal died." The tale of Lara Dorren, as told by elves.

