Chapter Two 

Ribbons of crystal clear water poured over the edge of the escarpment in a gentle arc, falling into a roaring and foaming cascade among the rocks, as black as onyx, before breaking onto them and disappearing among the white surf, which poured into an vast sheet of water so transparent that you could see every pebble, every braid of green seaweed waving in the current against a background of multicoloured mosaic.
Both banks were lined in a carpet of knotweed, among which a dipper bustled, splashing and proudly exposing the white ruffles on her neck.
Over the knotweed, bushes shimmered with green hues, looking brown and ocher on the background of spruce trees, which seemed to be sprinkled with silver powder.
"Truly," Dandelion sighed.
"It is beautiful here." A great dark trout tried to jump over the threshold of the waterfall.
For a moment it hung, suspended in the air, waving its sweeping tail fins before falling heavily into the roaring foam.
The darkening sky was suddenly shattered with a streak of forked lightning in the South, a hollow echo of distant thunder rolled across the wall of the forest.
The witcher's bay mare danced, pulled her head, and bared her teeth, trying to spit out the bit.
Geralt firmly tightened his grip on the reins, and the mare snapped her hooves, her horseshoes ringing on the stones, and continued to prance backwards.
"Ho! Hooo! Did you see her, Dandelion? She is a dancer! Damn, I look forward to the first opportunity I have to get rid of this animal! May it die, I'd even exchange it for an ass!" "And you consider that a possibility any time soon?" The poet scratched his neck, which was itchy from mosquito bites.
"The wild landscape of this valley provides an unparallelled aesthetic, but for variety, I'd be happy with the aesthetics of any cosy tavern.
Soon it will be one week that I have admired the romantic nature, landscapes and distant horizons.
I miss the interiors.
Especially those which give a hot meal and a cold beer." "Naturally, you will pine over this for some time." The witcher turned in his saddle.
"You can ease your pain knowing that I am a little homesick for civilisation too.
As you know, I was stuck in Brokilon for exactly thirty-six days.
And as many nights, during which the romantic nature froze my arse, crawled down my back and settled its dew on my nose ...
Hooo! Damn this mare! Will you finally cease your tantrum?" "She was bitten by horseflies.
The bugs have grown fierce and bloodthirsty, as often happens before a storm.
The thunder and flashes in the South are more frequent." "I noticed." The witcher looked at the sky, holding his horse which was still dancing.
"The wind has aslo changed, it smells of the sea.
The weather will change, no doubt.
We're going.
Hurry your fat little gelding, Dandelion." "My horse is called Pegasus." "As if it could be anything else.
You know what? We should also give my elvish mare a name.
Hmmm ..." "How about Roach?" Laughed the troubadour.
"Roach." The witcher agreed.
"Very nice." "Geralt?" "Tell me." "Have you ever had a horse called Roach?" "No." The witcher said after a moment's thought.
"I have not.
Hurry your lazy Pegasus, Dandelion.
We have a long road ahead of us." "Of course." The poet growled.
" How many miles is Nilfgaard, according to you?" "A lot." "Will we arrive before winter?" "First we'll get to Verden.
There we can discuss ...
certain matters." "What? Do not try and get rid of me! I'll keep you company, that's what I decided!" "We'll see.
As I said, we have to go through Verden." "Is it far? Do you know these areas?" "I do know them.
We are next to the waterfall of Ceann Treise, ahead of us is a place called the Seventh Mile.
The hills beyond the river are the Hills of the Owl." "And we are going South, over the river? The Ribbon joins the Yaruga near a fortress somewhere in the vicinity of Bodrog ..." "We will go South, by the bank.
Where the Ribbon tapes toward the West, we'll go through the forests.
I want to get to a place called Drieschot, or the Triangle.
There, the borders of Verden, Brugge and Brokilon converge." "And from there?" "We'll go over the Yaruga, to the mouth.
To Cintra." "And then?" "And then we'll see.
If at all possible, you could force your slothful Pegasus to go at a slightly faster pace." The rain caught up with them during the crossing, in the middle of the river.
First, a violent gale sprang up, its squalls like those of a hurricane, tugging their hair and clothes, and slashing their faces with leaves and sticks torn from trees along the riverbank.
They spurred their horses towards the shore with cries and blows, as water foamed around their horses hooves.
As they neared the other side, the wind ceased suddenly and a grey curtain of rain fell before them.
The surface of the Ribbon began to crack and boil as if someone threw billions of lead pellets from the sky.
Upon reaching the shore with great difficulty, they were transfixed by the violent downpour that had descended upon them.
They hastened to seek refuge in the woods.
The trees formed a canopy over their heads in a dense, green roof, however it could not protect them against such a torrent.
The rain quickly soaked the leaves, the branches bowed and after a while, it was raining in the forest just as much as it was out in the open.
They wrapped themselves in layers, and put on their hoods.
Among the trees there was darkness, pierced only by the lightning, which came more and more.
The storm raged without end, without interruption, and in a deafening roar.
Roach, who was frightened, stamped and danced.
Pegasus kept an imperturbable calm.
"Geralt!" Yelled Dandelion, trying to outshout another thunder clap, rolling through the forest like a giant wagon.
"Let us go! Let's seek shelter somewhere!" "Where?" the witcher replied loudly.
"Ride!" They advanced.
After a while the rain subsided significantly, the wind sounded again in the trees, the crackling thunder ceased to bore their ears.
They found themselves amongst a trail of dense alder, then came to a clearing.
In the glade grew a powerful beech, under its boughs, on a thick carpet of beechnuts and bronze leaves, was a cart drawn by a pair of mules.
The driver who sat on the cart, measured them with a crossbow.
Geralt swore, but the thunder drowned out the sound.
"Lower the crossbow, Kolda," said a small man in a straw hat, turning away from the trunk of the beech, hopping on one leg and buttoning his trousers.
"It's not who we expected.
But they are customers.
Don't threaten the customers.
We do not have much time, but there is always a little time to haggle!" "What the devil?" Dandelion growled behind Geralt.
"Come closer, gentlemen elves,"cried the man in the hat.
"Without fear, I'm your man.
N'ess and tearth! Va, seidhe.
Ceadmil! I am one of your own, understand, elf? To trade with? Well, come here, under the beechwood, it will not fall on your heads so much!" Geralt was not surprised by the mistake.
He and Dandelion were wrapped in grey cloaks that had belonged to elves.
He himself wore a doublet given to him by the Dryads, patterned with the leafy motifs favoured by elves, his face was partially covered by his hood and he was sitting on a horse with reins that were typically elven and characteristically decorated.
As for Dandelion the dandy, he had already been mistaken a few times for an elf or half-elf, especially since he had started wearing his hair to his shoulders and occasionally used curling irons.
"Watch out," Geralt muttered, dismounting.
"You are an elf.
Do not open your mouth unnecessarily." "Why?" "They are hawkers." Dandelion inhaled sharply.
He knew what they were.
Money ruled everything, and demand induced supply.
The Scoia'tael that raged in the woods looted valuable items.
The spoils were useless to them, however they could trade them for scarcely availbale equipment and weapons.
Thus an itinerant forest trade was born, and with it, came the kind people who like to trade in such paralysis.
Speculators who dealt with the Squirrels emerged on the sly, witht their carts in the transects, trails and clearings.
The elves called them hav'caaren, an untranslatable word, but associated with insatiable greed.
The term "Hawker" became widespread among humans, and the connotations were even uglier.
This was because they were nasty, cruel and ruthless people, who would stop at nothing, not even murder.
If they were captured by the military, hawkers could not count on mercy, so they did not to show it to others.
If someone crossed their path who they could sell to the soldiers, they reached for their crossbow or knife without hesitation.
Geralt and Dandelion were not in very good position, but fortunately the hawkers had taken them for elves.
Geralt tightened his hood around his face and began wondering what to do when they were discovered.
"What bad weather." The merchant rubbed his hands.
"It falls as if someone made a hole in the heavens! Tedd ugly, ell'ea? But it does not matter, there is no bad time for business.
There is no good and bad weather, just as there's no bad money eh, eh! Understand me elf?" Geralt nodded.
Dandelion grunted something vaguely from behind his hood.
Fortunately, the contemptuous dislike elves had for conversing with people was well known and surprised nobody.
The coachman however did not put down his crossbow.
It was not a good sign.
"Who are you and where are you from? From which commando?" The hawker, like any serious trader, was not to be put off by the gloomy reserve shown by his customers.
"From Coinneach Dá Reo? Angus Bri Cri? Or maybe Riordain? I know Riordain was seen a week ago, he'd sliced the necks of the royal bailiffs circulating the area on a cart, collecting taxes.
I'm after money, not wheat.
I do not take payment in tar, or grain, or clothes stained with blood - only mink, sable and ermine.
But most pleasing to me is the coins, or precious stones and jewellery! If you have any, we can do business.
I have first class goods! Evelienn - vara en ard scedde, ell'ea, understand me elf? I have it all.
Take a look." The merchant approached the cart, and pulled the edge of the wet sheet.
They saw swords, bows, feathered arrows and saddles.
The hawker rummaged through the pile of goods, and pulled out one of the arrows.
The tip was toothed and jagged.
"You will not find these anywhere else," he said boastfully.
"Not many others sell them because with spikes like that, if they get caught trading them, the soldiers will tear them to pieces.
But I know what Squirrels like, and the customer is king.
You cannot make business without taking risks, as long as there is triple profit of course! Back home ...
they are nine orens for a dozen.
Aen Naev'de tvedeane, ell'ea, you understand seidhe? I promise that its not a scam, I earn very little myself, I swear on the heads of my children.
If you take three dozen at once, well, I'll give you six percent discount! Only on this occasion of course, it is a one time offer...
Hey, seidhe, get off my wagon!" Dandelion fearfully withdrew his hand from the canvas, and pulled his hood further over his eyes.
For the umpteenth time, Geralt cursed the bard's curiosity.
"Mir'me vara." Dandelion muttered, raising his hand apologetically.
"Squaess'me." "No offence," the hawker grinned broadly.
"But do no look in the cart.
There is another, ahem, commodity, but it is not for sale, not for seidhe.
That is an order! Heh, heh! Well, here we stand and chatter ...
Show me the money." Here we go, thought Geralt, looking at the taut crossbow pointing at him.
He had grounds to assume that it held the infamous hawker's speciality – a fragmenting tip, which entered the stomach as one, and exited the back as three, sometimes four, mincing the internal organs.
"Tedd n'ess," he said, putting on an accent.
"Tearde.
Mireann vara, va'en vort.
We'll be back with the commando, then we'll trade.
Ell'ea? Understand dh'oine?" "I understand." The hawker spat.
"I understand that you are miserable, and would like to take the goods, but you havn't got a penny.
Get out of here! And do not come back because I have important people to meet and it would be in the interests of your own safety that they do not lay eyes on you.
Get out of..." He paused, hearing the whinny of a horse.
"The devil!" He growled.
"It's too late! They are already here! Hide your faces in your hoods, elves! Do not move or breathe a sound! Kolda, you arsehole, put down the crossbow, and hurry!" The noise of the rain, thunder and the carpet of leaves muffled the rumble of hooves, allowing the riders to ride quietly and circle around the beech in the blink of an eye.
They were not Scoia'tael.
Squirrels do not wear armour, and the eight surrounding the tree did.
Rain glistened on their helmets, shoulder pads and chain mail.
One of the riders approached the hawker, and stood over him like a mountain.
He was already tall, and sat on a mighty battle stallion.
His armoured shoulders were covered with a wolf pelt, and his face was obscured by a helmet featuring a large nose guard that reached his lower lip.
In his hand he held a menacing weapon, a Nadziak.
"Rideaux!" He cried hoarsely.
"Faoiltiarna!" The trader shouted, his voice breaking slightly.
The rider came even closer and leaned over in his saddle.
The rain splashed on the steel nose before falling onto the shoulder of the rider and then to the hammer head, which gleamed ominously.
"Faoiltiarna!" The hawker repeated, bowing at the waist.
He took off his hat, and the rain instantly pasted the thinning hair to his skull.
"Faoiltiarna! I am one of you, I know the signal and the password...
I come from Faoiltiarna, your honor...
I came to the meeting place under this beech, as had been arranged ..." "These here, who are they?" "My escort." The hawker bowed even deeper.
"This is what the elves..." "The prisoner?" "On the wagon.
In a coffin." "In a coffin?" The rider wearing the helmet let out a nasal roar which was partially drowned out by the thunder.
"You'll pay for this! Lord de Rideaux expressly ordered that the prisoner is to be delivered alive!" "He's alive, he's alive," stammered the dealer hastily.
"In accordance with the orders...
He was put in the coffin, but he's alive ...
The coffin wasn't my idea, your honor.
It was Faoiltiar..." The rider tapped his stirrup with the hammer.
Obeying the signal, three men on horseback dismounted and took off the cover of the cart.
When they had thrown the blankets, saddles and harnesses to the ground, Geralt saw, in a flash of lightning, a freshly cut pine coffin.
He was careful not to watch too closely however.
He felt a cold tingling in the tips of his fingers.
He knew what was about to happen.
"Now what shall I do?" The hawker said, looking at the mound of soaked goods on the wet leaves.
"You've emptied my cart!" "I will buy it all.
Including your escort." "Ahhh," a smile crept onto the overgrown mouth of the oily dealer.
"Of course, that will be...
Let me think ...
Five hundred if, with the permission of your Excellency, you pay in Temerian currency.
But if you pay in florens, then forty-five." "So cheap?" Snorted the horseman, a ghastly smile emerging from behind his noseguard.
"Come here then." "Watch out, Dandelion." The witcher whispered, discreetly undoing his jacket buckle.
It thundered.
The hawker approached the rider, naively hoping for the transaction of his life.
It was to be the transaction of his life...
maybe not the best, but certainly the last.
The rider stood up in his stirrups, took his momentum and planted his hammer onto the bald head of the hawker.
The merchant fell without a cry, shuddered, shook his hands, and tore his heels into the carpet of wet leaves.
One of the horsemen ran to the cart, threw the reins around the driver's neck, and tightened them, another rushed forward, and finished the job with a dagger.
One rider quickly raised his crossbow to shoulder height, aiming for Dandelion.
Geralt however, was already holding a sword he had pulled from the dealer's wagon.
Seizing the weapon by the middle of the blade, he threw it like a javelin.
The pierced bowman fell from his horse, still with an expression of boundless astonishment on his face.
"Run Dandelion!" Pegasus caught up with Dandelion and with a wild leap he jumped into the saddle, but the jump was a little too wild, and the poet lacked skill.
He was unable to stay in the saddle and flew to the ground on the opposite side of the horse.
It still saved his life though, the attacking rider's blade cut the air with a hiss over Pegasus' ears.
The gelding was startled, he stumbled, and collided with the horse of the assailant.
"They aren't elves!" Roared the rider wearing the helmet with the noseguard, drawing his sword.
"Take them alive! Alive!" One of the men who jumped from the cart, confused by this order, hesitated.
Geralt, who'd had time to grab his own sword, did not make the same mistake.
The ardor of the last two riders was somewhat cooled by the fountain of blood that poured on them.
Geralt took the opportunity to kill a second, but the riders were already on his back again.
He escaped their swords, parrying their blows, he made a dodge and suddenly felt a pressing pain in his right knee.
He felt that he was falling.
Yet he was not injured.
Without warning, the leg that had been treated at Brokilon refused to obey him.
The man on the ground who was about to knock him out with an axe, suddenly uttered a groan and staggered, as if someone had pushed him.
Before falling, the witcher saw an arrow with long feathers stuck deep into the side of the attacker.
Dandelion yelled.
It was drowned out by the thunder.
Geralt, clinging to the wheel of the cart, in the brief light of the lightning, saw a girl with flaxen hair coming out of the alder, a bow in her hand.
He also saw the horsemen.
They could not see her however, because one of them had just went over the rump of his horse, his throat sprayed with crimson pierced by the tip of an arrow.
The three remaining riders, including the commander in the helmet, realising the danger of the situation, cried and galloped towards the archer, hiding behind the necks of their horses.
They thought that the horse's necks would provide sufficient protection against the arrows.
They were wrong.
Maria Barring, nicknamed Milva, stretched her bow.
She measured, calmly, with the chord pressed to her face.
The first of the attackers screamed and slipped from his horse, his foot caught in the stirrup, and he was crushed by the shod hooves of his own mount.
The next arrow simply swept the second rider away from the saddle.
The third rider, the commander, was already close.
He stood in his stirrups, and raised his sword to strike.
Milva did not even flinch.
She looked at her attacker fearlessly, stretched her bow and from a distance of five paces, stuck an arrow in his face, right next to the steel noseguard.
The arrow passed through, the helmet dropped to the ground.
The horse slowed to a canter.
Without a helmet and a large part of his skull, the rider remained in the saddle for a few moments, then slowly leaned and fell into a puddle.
The horse whinnied and ran away.
Geralt got up with difficulty.
He rubbed his leg, which hurt, but surprisingly, it seemed to be quite efficient.
He was able to stand on it without trouble, and he could walk.
Dandelion crawled up from the ground nearby, pushing away the body with the split throat, which had landed on top of him.
The poet's face was the color of quicklime.
Milva approached, pulling her arrow from the dead horseman.
"Thank you." The witcher said.
"Dandelion, this is Milva Barring.
Thanks to her we are still alive." Milva pulled another arrow from a corpse, checking the bloody tip.
Dandelion muttered some indistinct words, bent down in a courteous, though somewhat shaky bow, then fell to his knees and vomited.
"Who is he?" The archer wiped the tip on some wet leaves, and put the arrow back into her quiver.
"A friend of yours witcher?" "Yes.
He's called Dandelion, he's a poet." "A poet." Milva looked at the troubadour who was now dry-vomiting, then raised her eyes.
"Well yes, then I understand.
I do not understand however, why he is here puking, instead of sitting in a town quietly writing rhymes.
Anyway, its not my business." "To some extent it is your business.
You saved his skin.
And mine too." Milva wiped her face splashed with rain, in which you could still see the imprint of the chord.
Although she fired several times, there was only one mark – the string was always placed at exactly the same position.
"I was already in the alder when you started talking to the hawker," she said.
"I did not want those villains to see me however, and there was no urgency.
But then the others came and started all the fun.
You knocked down a few, and you certainly know how to shake a sword...
But you are lame, you should have stayed in Brokilon to heal your leg.
If your injury gets worse, you risk a limp for the rest of your life.
You are aware of this, no doubt?" "I will survive." "Thats what I believe, indeed.
Because I was riding behind you on your trail to warn you.
To warn you to turn back.
Nothing will come of your journey.
In the South, is war.
Nilfgaard's troops march from Drieschot to Brugge." "How do you know?" "Just look around you," the girl pointed to the corpses of the men and horses with a flourish.
"These are Nilfgaardians! Do you not see the sun on their helmets? The embroidery on their trappings? Gather your things, we should take to our heels, there may be more coming from downstream.
These men were sent to scout the area." "I don't think," he shook his head, "these men were sent to investigate.
They came here for something else." "Why were they here then, out of curiosity?" "They were here for that." He pointed to the pine coffin lying in the cart, the wood had been darkened by the rain.
It was already raining less now and the thunder had stopped.
The storm was moving towards the North.
The witcher picked up his sword which was lying among the leaves, and jumped onto the cart, cursing softly at his knee, still reminiscent of the pain.
"Help me open it." "What are you doing, the dead want to rest..." Milva broke off, seeing the holes drilled in the cover.
"Damn! The hawker was carrying a live one in that box?" "It's a prisoner," Geralt levered the lid.
"The merchant was waiting for the Nilfgaardians here to give it to them.
I heard them exchange a signal and password ..." The cover tore off with a bang, revealing a man gagged, leather loops attached to the sides of the coffin for his arms and legs.
The witcher bent.
He looked closely.
And once again, more carefully.
He swore.
"Hold on," he said slowly.
"Now, that's a surprise.
Who would have thought?" "You know him, witcher?" In answer to her question, Geralt smiled nastily in full view of the prisoner.
"Put the knife away, Milva.
Do not cut his shackles.
This is an internal affair of Nilfgaard.
We should not interfere.
We will leave him as he is." "Did I hear right?" Dandelion said behind them.
He was still pale, but curiosity had already overcome his other emotions.
"You want to leave a man bound in chains in the forest? My guess is that you have recognised someone with whom you have a bone to pick, but they are still a prisoner, hell! They were a prisoner of the people who attacked and almost killed us.
The enemy of our enemies ..." He paused, seeing the witcher pull a knife from his boot.
Milva cleared her throat softly.
The dark blue eyes of the prisoner, narrowed from the constant dripping of rain drops, now widened.
Geralt leaned over and cut the loop binding his left arm.
"Look, Dandelion," he said, grabbing the wrist and raising the released hand.
"You see this scar on his hand? Its where Ciri cut him.
On the island of Thanedd, a month ago.
He's a Nilfgaardian.
He came to Thanedd specifically to abduct Ciri.
She made this cut, to avoid being kidnapped." "This hand obviosuly hasn't served him very well in defense," Milva muttered.
"Still, something here does not make sense.
If this one kidnapped Ciri on behalf of Nilfgaard, why has he fallen into that coffin? Why did the hawker want to sell him to Nilfgaardians? Remove the gag from his mouth, witcher.
Maybe he will tell us something?" "I do not want to listen to him," he said in a hoarse voice.
"My hand itches, when i see him lying there, looking at me.
I can hardly hold back.
If he starts talking, I will not be able to restrain myself.
I haven't told you everything about him." "In this case, do what you like," Milva shrugged.
"Hit him, if he's such a bastard.
But quickly, because time is pressing.
As I said, the Nilfgaardians are not far away.
I'll get my horse." Geralt straightened up, releasing the prisoner's hand.
He immediately tore from his mouth and spat out the gag, but did not speak.
The witcher tossed the knife onto his chest.
"I do not know for what sins they put you in this box, Nilfgaardian," he said.
"I do not care.
I leave you this knife, liberation itself.
Wait here for your friends or get lost in the woods, whatever." The prisoner was silent.
Hands and feet bound, lying at the bottom of a wooden box, he looked even more wretched and vulnerable than he had on Thanedd, where Geralt had seen him on his knees, wounded, trembling with fear in a pool of blood.
He looked much younger too.
The witcher did not give him more than twenty-five years.
"I spared you on the island," he added.
"And I will spare you now.
But it's the last time.
The next time we meet, I'll kill you like a dog.
Remember that.
If you want to persuade your comrades to chase after us, take the coffin with you.
You will need it.
Come on, Dandelion." "Come on, quickly!" Milva cried, returning to the path leading West in a gallop.
"But not that way! The forest! Son-of-a-bitch! Into the forest!" "What happened?" "An army comes from the Ribbon! It's Nilfgaard! What are you looking at? Get on your horses, before they overtake us!" *** The battle in the village had already lasted an hour and still there were no indications that the end was nearing.
The foot soldiers that defended from behind stone walls, fences and carts arranged in a barricade, had now repelled three cavalry attacks which had charged at them from the dike.
The width of the dike would not let the horses gather frontal momentum and allowed the soldiers to focus their defense.
As a result, each wave of cavalry fell apart at every attempt against the barricades from which desperate but stubborn footmen shot at the troops of horsemen with a shower of darts and arrows.
The cavalry fired up and swirled, and the defenders fell on them in a quick counterattack, killing all who were left with axes, spears and flails.
The cavalry retreated over the dike, leaving the corpses of men and horses, and the soldiers hid behind the barricades throwing the enemy filthy insults.
After some time, the cavalry formed up and attacked again.
And so on.
"I wonder who fights with whom?" Dandelion asked, though it was hard to understand him.
Milva had given him some stale bread and he was trying to soften it in his mouth.
They sat on the edge of a cliff, well hidden among juniper bushes.
They could observe the battle without fear of being seen.
Or rather, the only thing they could do was watch.
They had no other choice.
Before them the battle raged, and the forest behind them was on fire.
"It is not difficult to guess," Geralt finally, but unwillingly decided to answer Dandelion's question.
"The men on horseback are Nilfgaardians." "And the foot soldiers?" "They are not Nilfgaardian." "The mounted soldiers are the volunteer cavalry of Verden," Milva said, who had been suspiciously tight-lipped and grim.
"They are the ones in the chequered jackets, and those in the village are the soldiers of Brugge.
I know their banner." Indeed, rejuvenated by their new success, the infantry had hoisted a green flag on the ramparts with a cross embedded in white.
Until then, Geralt had not seen any standard, but as he had carefully observed, the defenders had just hoisted one.
Apparently they had lost at the beginning of the battle.
"How long will we sit here?" Dandelion asked.
"There you have it," muttered Milva.
"What a question.
Look around! If you cannot rotate yourself, get up off your arse and look." Dandelion did not have to look or turn round.
The entire horizon was streaked with plumes of smoke.
In the North and West the smoke was the thickest, where one of the armies had set fire to the forest.
The sky to the South, the direction in which they'd been heading towards when the battle had cut off the road, was also black.
And in just one hour, in the time they had spent on the mountain, the smoke had also spread to the East.
"Nevertheless," the archer took a moment, looking at Geralt, "I am curious as to what you intend to do now, witcher.
Behind us Nilfgaard and burning forest, and lying ahead...
well, you can see.
What's your plan then?" "My plan hasn't changed.
Wait out the brawl, then I'm heading South.
Over the Yaruga." "Perhaps you have lost your mind." Milva frowned.
"You will see what happens.
You can plainly see that this is war, it is not just some playful tour of men.
Nilfgaard goes straight from Verden.
Going South, they will certainly have passed all of Brugge, and have probably crossed the Yaruga.
Perhaps even Sodden is on fire..." "I have to reach the Yaruga." "Perfect.
And then?" "I'll find a raft, and sail with the tide, I'll try to get to the estuary.
Then I'll find a boat ...
From there, damn it, there must be a boat..." "To Nilfgaard?" She laughed.
"So, your plans haven't changed?" "You do not have to accompany me." "Of course, I'm not obliged to.
To which I thank the gods, because I do not seek death.
Me, I do not fear anything, but I must say to you: do not be so fearless that you get yourself killed." "I know," he replied calmly.
"I understand this.
I would not travel this way if I did not have to.
But I have to, so I'm going.
Nothing can stop me." "Ha!" She measured him with her eyes.
"Your voice sounds as though someone were scratching the bottom of an old pot with a knife.
Had the Emperor heard you, he'd let go of his pants in fear.
"To me guards! To me, the Imperial cohort! Woe is me, woe is me! A witcher comes to me in a canoe, he will be here soon, he will take my life and deprive me of my crown! I'm lost!"" "Stop it, Milva." "Like hell! It's time that someone told you to finally face the truth.
Let me never skin a rabbit again if I have ever seen a more idiotic man! You think you are going to snatch the girl away from Emhyr? The girl that he has set his sights on? The girl that he has taken from kings? Emhyr has strong claws, which do not let go easily.
Even kings are afraid of him, and you want to take something of his?" He did not answer.
"You are about to go to Nilfgaard," Milva repeated, nodding her head in pity.
"To make war with an Emperor, and to take away his bride.
Have you not thought about what might happen? When you get there, when you find this Ciri in her room at the palace, in all her gold and silks, what are you going to say? Come, love, to me, why would you stay here at the Imperial throne, when the two of us can live together in a hut and eat bark till the harvest.
Look around you, you ragged cripple! Even the cloak and boots you got from the Dryads belonged to some elf before that, who died of his wounds in Brokilon.
You know what will happen when you find your lady? She will spit in your face and laugh, she will order the palace to throw you out and give you as food to the dogs!" Milva spoke louder and louder, and at the end of her speech she was almost screaming.
Not only with anger, but to outshout the growing noise of the battle.
From below, dozens, maybe hundreds of throats bellowed.
A new attack had spilled onto the defenders of Brugge.
But this time from both sides simultaneously.
The cavalry of Verden, in their blue chequered robes, rode along the embankment, while a large detachment of horsemen in black coats came from behind the dike, attacking the defenders at the flank.
"Nilfgaard," said Milva curtly.
This time the infantry of Brugge had no chance.
The cavalry broke through the barrier and instantly spread the defenders with their swords.
The banner of the cross fell.
Some of the soldiers threw down their weapons and surrendered, and some tried to flee towards the forest.
However a third division attacked from the forest, a host of light infantry riders wearing motley uniforms.
"Scoia'tael." Milva said, getting up.
"Now do you understand what is happening, witcher? Has it come to your brain yet? Nilfgaard, Verden and the Squirrels are in cahoots.
This is war.
As in Aedirn a month ago." "It is a raid," Geralt shook his head.
"A raid for loot.
They are men on horseback only, not infantry, there is no ..." "The infantry has already reached the strongholds and assemblies.
Those fumes, where do you think they are from? From the salmon smokehouse?" From the village below, came the wild, shrill cries of fugitives fleeing, and being massacred by the Squirrels.
The rooves of huts burst into smoke and flames.
The strong wind had dried the thatched tops after the morning downpour, the fire spread rapidly.
"Oh," muttered Milva, "the village is going up in smoke, and its not long since it was rebuilt after the war.
For two years they toiled to build foundations, and it is all destroyed in a few moments.
Are you learning anything from this?" "What can I learn?" Geralt asked sharply.
She did not answer.
The smoke from the burning village rose up high, reaching the cliff.
It stung their eyes, and made them weep.
Screams echoed from the conflagration.
Dandelion suddenly turned as pale as a sheet.
The prisoners were rounded up and surrounded by a ring of horsemen.
At the command of a knight who wore a helmet with black plumes, the riders began to mow down and stab at the helpless.
Those who fell were trampled by the horses.
The circle was closing.
The cries, which carried up to the cliff, no longer resembled the voices of humans.
"And you are certain we have to go South?" Asked the poet, looking meaningfully at the witcher.
"Through these fires? Where there is such butchery?" "I feel," said Geralt reluctantly, "that we have no choice." "Well," Milva said.
"I can take you through the forests to Owl Hill and back to the Ceann Treise, towards Brokilon." "Through the burning forests? So we risk passing the troops, which we barely escaped before?" "It is safer than taking the road to the South.
The Ceann Treise is only fourteen miles from here, and I know the path." The witcher looked down at the village which had perished in the fire.
The Nilfgaardians had already dealt with the prisoners and the cavalry had gathered into a marching column.
The motley crew of Scoia'tael had started moving, taking the path to the East.
"I cannot go back," he said firmly.
"But you can accompany Dandelion to Brokilon." "No!" the poet protested, though he still hadn't regained a normal color.
"I'm going with you." Milva waved her hand, she picked up her bow and quiver, walked towards her horse, and suddenly turned around.
"The devil," she snapped.
"I've spent too much time trying to save the elves from certain doom.
I cannot just stand and watch now as you go to your deaths! I will go with you to the Jaruga, you crazy fools, but not by the Southern track, only the route to the East." "The forests are already on fire there too." "I'll take you through the flames, I'm used to it." "You do not have to do that, Milva." "Of course, I don't have to.
Well, get in the saddle! Finally, lets get moving!" The three companions did not get far.
Their horses could hardly move through the overgrown paths.
They did not dare to use the roads, the sound of clattering armour and swords clashing betrayed the presence of troops all around.
Twilight surprised them while they were on a trail through a ravine tangled with bushes, and they decided to stop for the night.
It was not raining, and the sky was clear, aglow from the fire.
They found a relatively dry place, sat down, and wrapped themselves in cloaks and blankets.
Milva went to inspect the area.
As soon as she left, Dandelion proceeded to vent his curiosity, which the Brokilon archer had aroused in him.
"That girl certainly likes a bit of action," he muttered.
"You're lucky, you have a gift for meeting these kinds of women, Geralt.
Slender and graceful, she walks as if she's dancing.
A bit too narrow in the hips for my taste, and her shoulders are a little broad, but still feminine, ah yes feminine ...
Those two apples on the front, ho, ho ...
Soon her shirt will burst open..." "Shut up, Dandelion." "On the road," the dreaming poet continued, "I happened to touch her by accident.
Her thighs, I tell you, they are like marble.
Oh I tell you, you can't have been bored during the month you spent in Brokilon..." Milva, who had just returned from her patrol, had heard Dandelion's theatrical whispers, and felt the stares.
"Talking about me, poet? Why do you stare at me when my back is turned? Do I have bird shit on it?" "We cannot help but admire the skill in which you handle your bow," Dandelion grinned.
"You would not find many competitors in archery tournaments." "Lies, lies." "I've read," Dandelion flashed a look at Geralt, "that the best archers are Zerrikanian, those of the Steppe clans.
Some reportedly cut their right breast, so that they do not get in the way when tightening their arches.
The bust, they say, falls into the path of the chord." "That is the invention of a poet!" Milva laughed.
"He writes that kind of nonsense, whilst dipping his pen into the chamber pot, and only fools believe it.
What, we shoot arrows from our tits? We must stand to the side and draw the chord to our mouth, it is as simple as that.
Nothing gets in the way of the chord.
These stories about cutting, they are an invention of an idle head, obsessed with the breasts of women." "Thank you for your full appreciation of poets and their poetry.
And as for the science of archery, the bow is a good weapon.
You know what? I think it is precisely in this direction they will develop the art of war.
In future we will fight from a distance.
Weapons will be invented so far-reaching, that the opponents will be able to kill one other without seeing eachother at all." "Rubbish," Milva summed up her feelings in one word.
"The bow is a good thing, but war is man against his opponent, at swords length, the strongest smashes the weakest.
It has always been like that and has no reason to change.
If it stops, then all wars will end.
Until then, you see what war is like, in that village over the dike.
Eh, what's the use of talking in vain.
I'll take a walk and look around.
The horses whinny like there is a wolf circling nearby..." "A beautiful woman," Dandelion gazed at her.
"Hmmm ...
Remember what she said, when we were sat atop the cliff above the village causeway...
Can you not admit that she had her reasons?" "Reasons?" "Relative to ...
Ciri," the poet stammered a little.
"Our beautiful wench that shoots faster than her own shadow does not seem to understand the relationship between you and Ciri, and it seems to me that she thinks you intend to compete with the Emperor of Nilfgaard for her hand.
That is the real theme of your trip to Nilfgaard." "In regards to this, she is not correct, not even one little bit.
So how was she right?" "Wait, do not fret.
But look at the truth.
You protect Ciri and you consider yourself her guardian, but this is no ordinary girl.
She is a royal child, Geralt.
She is predestined for the throne, and there is no doubt about it.
A palace, a crown...
Maybe not that of Nilfgaard, I don't know if Emhyr would be the best of husbands..." "No.
You do not know." "Well, do you know?" The witcher wrapped himself in his blanket.
"You obviously have your own theory," he growled.
"But don't strain yourself, I know what you're thinking.
That it makes no sense to save Ciri from the fate that was written from her birth.
Because Ciri, once saved, will be ready to order her servants to throw us down the steps of the palace.
Let's leave it.
Ok?" Dandelion opened his mouth, but Geralt did not give him time to speak.
"The girl," he said, his voice becoming more agitated.
"Was not kidnapped after all, by a dragon or an evil sorcerer, she was not bought from pirates for a ransom.
She does not sit in the tower, in a dungeon or in a cage, she is not tortured or dying of hunger.
On the contrary, she sleeps on damask sheets, eats on silver plates, wears silk and lace, adorned with jewellery, and soon a crown.
In short, she's happy.
And an evil witcher, who once accidentally put alot of harm in her way, is determined to spoil, destroy, to trample her happiness, with his shoes full of holes, which he inherited from some elf.
Yes?" "That is not what I meant," grumbled Dandelion.
"He's not talking to you." Milva emerged suddenly from the darkness, and after a moment's hesitation she sat down next to the witcher.
"That was for me.
These were my words that I hurt him so much with, the words that I spoke in anger, not thinking...
Forgive me, Geralt.
I know how it feels when a claw is pressed into a fresh wound.
Please, do not be angry.
I won't do it again.
Will you forgive me? Do I have to beg for forgiveness?" Without waiting for an answer or his consent, she took him firmly by the neck and kissed him on the cheek.
He held her shoulders tightly.
"Come closer," he coughed.
"And you too, Dandelion.
Together...
for more warmth." They were silent for long time.
In the clear, burning sky, the clouds shifted, obscuring the twinkling stars.
"I want to tell you something," Geralt said finally.
"But swear that you will not laugh at me." "Tell me." "I had strange dreams.
In Brokilon.
At first I thought it was delirium, something messing with my head.
I did afterall receive a few blows to it while I was on Thanedd.
But even the last few days I am still dreaming the same dream.
Still the same." Milva and Dandelion were silent.
"Ciri," he took a moment, "does not sleep in the palace under a brocade canopy.
She's riding on horseback through some dusty village ...
The villagers point fingers.
They call her a name, which I do not know.
The dogs bark.
She is not alone.
There are others.
There's a girl with short hair holding Ciri's hand...
and Ciri smiles at her.
I don't like that smile, and I don't like her harsh makeup...
But what I dislike most is that death follows in their footsteps." "Where is she then?" Milva purred hugging him like a cat.
"Not in Nilfgaard?" "I do not know," he said with difficulty.
"But I dreamed the same dream several times.
The problem is, I do not believe in such dreams." "Well you are stupid then.
I believe in them." "I do not know," he repeated.
"But I feel something is happening.
Before her is fire, and after her death.
I have to hurry." *** At dawn it started raining.
Not like the previous day, when the storm was accompanied by a strong, but short-lived downpour.
The sky was dark and veiled by a lead curtain.
It started drizzling, finely, evenly, and annoyingly so.
They rode to the East.
Milva lead.
When Geralt turned her attention and said that the Yaruga was to the South, the archer insulted him and reminded him that she was the guide and she knew what she was doing.
They spoke no more.
In the end, it was important that they made progress, the direction was not significant.
They rode in silence, wet, cold, shrinking in their saddles.
They kept to the forest paths, moving adjascent to the roads, cutting off the highways.
As they travelled in the thicket, they heard hooves and the clatter of armour on the road.
They avoided the tumult of battle roars in a wide arc.
They passed villages devoured by fire, reduced to smoking red rubble, and settlements which had not been more than squares of scorched black earth, smothered in the acidic stench of debris washed by rain.
Frightened flocks of crows fed on corpses.
They passed groups of villagers bent under the weight of their packs, fleeing the war and escaping their burned homes, only responding with their dull, mute faces, painted in disbelief, their eyes empty, full of terror and misery.
They rode to the East, through the fire and smoke, drizzle and mist, and before their eyes scrolled the horrific tapestry of war.
The dreadful images.
The image of a hoist, a black line sticking out among the ruins of burned villages.
From the pole hung a naked corpse.
Head down.
Blood from his torn belly and groin dripped onto his chest and face, coagulating in patches on his hair.
On the back of the corpse could be seen the rune Ard.
Cut with a knife.
"An'givare." Milva said, pushing away the damp hair from the nape of her neck.
"The Squirrels have been here." "What does an'givare mean?" "Informer." The image of a horse, a grey-white horse with a black flank.
The horse walked unsteadily along the edge of the battlefield, dodging between the piles of corpses and spears fixed in the ground, neighing quietly, chillingly, dragging his entrails behind him from his open belly.
They could not finish him - in addition to the horse on the battlefield, there were stragglers wandering, stripping the bodies.
The image of the girl, arms outstretched, lying near the burnt bypass, naked, bloodied, her glassy eyes staring at the sky.
"They say that war is a thing of men," Milva growled.
"But they have no mercy for women, they have to have their fun.
And they are called heroes...
bastards." "You're right.
But it will change." "I changed.
I ran away from home.
I did not want to sweep and scrub the floor of a cottage.
I did not want to wait for them to come, set fire to the cottage, and degrade me on the floor I..." She did not finish.
She urged her horse onwards.
And then there was the image of the village.
Dandelion vomited everything he ate that day, which was only half a biscuit and a sardine.
In the village, the Nilfgaardians – or maybe the Scoia'tael – had settled accounts with a number of prisoners.
The number of dead was impossible to determine, or even to approximate.
To get rid of them hastily, not only were arrows, swords and lances used, but also lumberjack equipment they had found on site - axes, saws and long handsaws.
There were other images, but Geralt, Dandelion and Milva no longer remembered them.
They had expelled them from memory.
They became indifferent.
*** For the next two days they travelled only about twenty miles.
It was still raining.
After the summer drought, the land was now soaked with water and the forest paths had turned to mud slides.
The heavy mists and fog took away their opportunity to observe the smoke of the fires, but the stench of burning indicated that the troops were still close and still burned everything in sight.
They had not seen any refugees.
They were alone among the trees in the forest.
Or so they thought.
Geralt first heard the whinny of a horse following them.
With a stony face, he turned Roach.
Dandelion opened his mouth, but Milva passed him a silent gesture, she took her bow from the quiver on her saddle.
The intruder emerged from the bushes.
He saw that they were waiting for him and stopped his horse, a chestnut stallion.
They stood there frozen in silence, which was broken only by the sound of rain.
"I forbade you to follow us," said the witcher finally.
The Nilfgaardian, who Dandelion last saw in a coffin, was wet from the rain and his eyes were hidden by his soaked hair.
The poet barely recognized him.
He was clad in chain mail, a leather jacket and overcoat, without a doubt taken from one of the people killed next to the hawker's cart.
Dandelion noted, however, the youth of his face, which was recognizable from their adventure near the beech, despite the beard that was just emerging from his chin.
"I have forbidden you to follow," repeated the witcher.
"I am forbidden," finally admitted the youngster.
He spoke without a Nilfgaardian accent.
"But I have to." Geralt jumped from his horse and handed the reins to the poet.
He drew his sword.
"Get down," he said calmly.
"I see you have already managed to procure a piece of iron.
That's good.
I could not kill you when you were helpless.
Now it's different.
Dismount." "I will not fight you.
I do not want to." "I thought so.
Like all your countrymen, you prefer a different kind of fight.
Such as the kind in the village, which you must have passed, following our trail.
Dismount, I said." "I am Cahir Mawr Dyffryn aep Ceallach." "I did not ask you to introduce yourself.
I ordered you to dismount." "I will not dismount, I have no desire to fight." "Milva," the witcher nodded at the archer.
"Do me a favour, kill the horse he's sitting on." "No!" The Nilfgaardian raised his hand before Milva had a chance to place an arrow on her string.
"No, please, I will dismount." "That's better.
And now draw your sword, boy." The youngster crossed his arms over his chest.
"Kill me if you want.
Or if you prefer, tell this elf to shoot me with her bow.
I'm not going to fight you.
I'm Cahir Mawr Dyffryn ...
son of Ceallach.
I want ...
I want to join you." "I must have misunderstood.
Repeat." "I want to join you.
You're going in search of the girl, I want to help you.
I need to help." "This is crazy," Geralt turned to Milva and Dandelion.
"He's suffering from insanity.
We are dealing with a madman." "He will fit in with our company then," Milva muttered.
"He will fit in perfectly." "Think about his proposal, Geralt." sneered Dandelion.
"After all, he is a Nilfgaardian nobleman.
Perhaps he will make it easier for us to get to..." "Keep your tongue in check." The witcher sharply interrupted him.
"Go on, draw your sword, Nilfgaardian." "No, I will not fight.
And I'm not Nilfgaardian.
I come from Vicovaro, and my name is ..." "I do not care what your name is.
Draw your weapon." "No." "Witcher," Milva leaned over in her saddle, and spat on the ground.
"Time passes, and we are soaked to the bone.
The Nilfgaardian does not want to stand against you and, although you put on a fierce air, I highly doubt you will kill him in cold blood.
Are we going to have to stand here forever? I will put an arrow in his horse's belly and we can be on our way.
He'll not be able to follow." Cahir, son of Ceallach, took one jump and caught his chestnut stallion, leapt into the saddle and galloped off, shouting at the horse to run faster.
The witcher watched him for a moment, climbed onto Roach, and rode on.
In silence.
Not looking back.
"I must be getting old," he muttered after a while, when Roach had caught up with Milva's black bay.
"I am beginning to have scruples." "Aww well, it happens when you're old," the archer looked at him with compassion.
"A decoction of honey will help.
In the meantime, put a pillow on your saddle." "Scruples." Dandelion explained seriously, "This is not the same as hemorrhoids, Milva.
You've got the wrong idea." "And who would have instantly understood your gibberish! And you talk constantly, you don't even know it! Go, go!" "Milva," the witcher asked after a while, protecting his face from the rain as he rode at a canter.
"You really would have killed his horse?" "No." She admitted reluctantly.
"The horse is not guilty.
And even this Nilfgaardian...
Why would he follow us? Why did he say he had to?" "I'll be damned if I know." It was raining still, when the forest ended abruptly and they came to a road, winding through the hills from South to North.
Or from North to South, according to their point of view.
What they saw on the highway, did not surprise them.
They had seen it all before.
Carts overturned and shattered, dead horses, scattered packs, saddles and baskets.
Broken forms, frozen in poses of strange shapes, which until recently had been human beings.
They rode closer, and without fear, because it was obvious that the massacre had not taken place today, but yesterday or the day before.
They had already learned to recognize these things, and maybe they truly felt an animal instinct, which had been awakened and sensitised in them over the previous days.
They had also learned to explore the battlefield, because sometimes, rarely, they managed to find among the belongings a little lunch or a sack of feed.
They stopped by the last column of the wagon, which had been struck by lightning and lay in the ditch, resting lopsided on its shattered wheel hub.
Under the wagon lay a stout woman, her neck bent in an unnatural position.
The collar of her cloak, soaked by the rain, had patches of clotted blood from her ear that had been torn away from the earring.
On the tarp that covered the cart were the words: "Vera Loewenhaupt and Sons." But there was no trace of the word Sons.
"They were not peasants," Milva said with clenched lips.
"But merchants.
They came from the South, from Dillingen on their way to Brugge, and they were attacked here.
Its not good, witcher.
I thought we could branch off to the South, but now I truly do not know what to do...
Dillingen, and inevitably Brugge are in the hands of Nilfgaard, we will not reach the Yaruga that way.
We must continue East, by Turlough.
There, the forests are wild and deserted, the army will not go that way." "I'm not going further East." The witcher protested.
"I must reach the Yaruga." "You will reach it," unexpectedly, she replied calmly.
"But this is the safer route.
If we move South from here, we will fall straight into the jaws of Nilfgaard.
There's nothing to gain." "We will gain time," he growled.
"Going to the East will just waste it.
I told you, I cannot afford to do that..." "Quiet!" Dandelion piped up suddenly, turning his horse.
"Stop talking for a moment." "What is it?" "I hear ...
singing." The witcher shook his head, Milva giggled.
"You're having hallucinations, poet." "Quiet! Shut up! Someone is singing, I'm telling you! Don't you hear it?" Geralt pulled off his hood, Milva also pricked up her ears, and after a moment she looked at the witcher and nodded silently.
The troubadour was right.
His musical ear had not betrayed him.
That which seemed impossible, turned out to be true.
Stood here in the middle of the forest, in the drizzle, with corpses scattered on the road, yet a happy song reached their ears.
From the South, someone came, singing briskly and cheerfully.
Milva pulled the reins of her horse ready to flee, but the witcher gestured her to stop.
He was intrigued.
The singing that they heard was not menacing.
Not the rhythmic, pounding voices of marching infantry or the cavalry's cocky song.
The song that came did not raise anxiety.
Quite the opposite.
The rain rustled the foliage.
They began to distinguish the words of the song.
It was a merry song, which in this landscape of war and death, was something alien, unnatural and totally inappropriate.
By the woods can you see, wolf in all his might, Grinning madly, wagging gladly, bouncing with delight.
My, oh my, what a sight! Why no melancholy? Must be that still not wed, that is why so jolly! Um-ta, um-ta, uhu-ha! Dandelion laughed suddenly, pulled out the lute from under his wet coat, and paying no attention to the hisses of Geralt and Milva, he plucked the strings and sang in a loud voice: In the grass can you see, wolf just limps along, Looking down, awful frown, crying like a dog.
Why is this mighty beast so badly rampaged? Must be that, freshly wed or lately engaged! "Hu-hu-ha!" Replied a chorus of many voices, sounding nearby.
A roar of laughter rang out, someone whistled piercingly on their fingers, then from behind the bend in the highway emerged a strange, yet picturesque company, marching in single file, splashing the mud, with rhythmic stomps of heavy boots.
"Dwarves," Milva said in an undertone.
"But it's not Scoia'tael.
Their beards are not matted." There were six of them.
They were clothed in the usual dwarven attire, short, brown coats with hoods, in various shades of grey and shimmering bronze.
Having over the years been impregnated with tar and dust on the roads, as well as oily food scraps, coats like that, Geralt knew, had the advantage of being completely water-proof.
This practical piece of clothing was passed down from father to eldest son, so it was usually only worn by mature dwarves.
A dwarf reached maturity when his beard reached his belt, which occurred usually at the age of fifty five years.
None of the approaching party looked younger than that.
But not older.
"They're guiding humans," Milva muttered, nodding her head at the huddled group emerging from the woods in the wake of the six dwarves.
"They are refugees no doubt, they are carrying loaded bundles." "The dwarves are already loaded." said Dandelion.
Indeed, each dwarf was hauling a pack, under the weight of which more than one man or even a horse would have buckled quite quickly.
Besides the usual bags and sacks, Geralt saw locked caskets, a copper cauldron and what looked like a little small chest of drawers.
One was carrying on his back the wheel of a cart.
The one walking at the head did not carry any luggage.
He wore a small hatchet on his belt, a long sword in a scabbard on his back wrapped in deer skins, and on his shoulder a green parrot with wet and ruffled feathers.
It was this dwarf that greeted them.
"Good day!" He bellowed, pausing in the middle of the road with his hands on his hips.
"The times are such that its better to meet a wolf in the forest than a man, and if it has to be, it is advisable to greet him with a crossbow than to welcome him with good words! But he who greets you with a song to music, thats your man! Or, woman, my apologies good lady! Hello, I am Zoltan Chivay." "I'm Geralt," the witcher introduced himself after a moment's hesitation.
"The one who sang is Dandelion.
And this is Milva." "Rrr-rrwa mother!" Croaked the parrot.
"Shut yer beak!" snapped Zoltan Chivay.
"Excuse me.
This bird is smart, but is very rude.
Ten thalers I paid for this rarity.
He is called Field Marshal Duda.
And this is the rest of my company.
This is Munro Bruys, Yazon Varda, Caleb Stratton, Figgis Merluzzo and Percival ...
Schuttenbach." Percival Schuttenbach was not a dwarf.
From under his wet hood, instead of a tangled beard, protruded a very long and pointed nose, reliably identifying the nationality of the holder to be that of the old and noble race of gnomes.
"And the others," Zoltan Chivay pointed to the nearby group who had caught up and stopped not far away.
"Are refugees from Kernow.
As you can see they are only women with their toddlers.
There were more, but Nilfgaard attacked their group three days ago, and the rest were massacred.
We came across them in the woods and now we travel together." "Yet you walk with confidence on the roads," ventured the witcher.
"Singing at the top of your voices." "I do not think," the dwarf played with his beard, "that crying and walking is a better choice.
From Dillingen we walked through the woods, quietly and carefully.
Once the troops had passed, we went out into the road to make up time." He paused, looking at the battlefield.
"The views," he pointed to the corpses, "we have become accustomed to.
From Dillingen, from the Yaruga, there is nothing but death on the highways ...
You were part of this convoy?" "No.
The Nilfgaardians killed some merchants before we got here." "It was not Nilfgaardians." The dwarf shook his head, looking at the dead bodies with a cold expression.
"It was Scoia'tael.
Regualr soldiers do not bother to pull their arrows from the corpses.
A good tip cost half a crown." "He knows what he's talking about," muttered Milva.
"Where are you going?" "South," Geralt said immediately.
"I would not recommend it." Zoltan Chivay shook his head again.
"There is hell, fire and destruction.
Dillingen is probably already taken, and the dark riders are more likely to cross the Yaruga, they will soon occupy the entire valley from the right bank.
As you can see, they are already before us, and to the North, they head for Brugge.
Therefore, the only reasonable direction to flee is the East." Milva gave a knowing look to the witcher, who refrained from commenting.
"We are just going to the East," continued Zoltan Chivay.
"The only chance is to hide behind the front, and the Temerian army will be coming from the East, from the river Ina.
We will then go to the hills, along the forest paths.
We will go first to Turlough, then we will continue along the Old Road up the river Chotla by Sodden, which flows into the Ina.
If you want, we will walk together.
That is if the slowness of our progress does not pose a problem.
You, you have horses, but we, our pace is slowed by the refugees." "I know," said Milva, looking keenly at him, "that a dwarf, even with luggage, can make thirty miles a day.
Almost as much as a man on a horse.
I know the Old Road.
Without the refugees, you would be at the Chotla in three days." "These are women and children," Zoltan Chivay puffed out his beard and belly.
"We can not leave them at the mercy of fate.
Are you going to tell me otherwise?" "No," the witcher said.
"We wouldn't say that." "I am glad to hear it.
It means my first impressions were right.
So then, do we walk together?" Geralt looked at Milva.
The archer nodded.
"Good." Zoltan Chivay acknowledged the gesture.
"Let's get on the road then, before a patrol surprises us.
But first ...
Yazon, Munro, go and search the carts.
If something useful survived, load it up quickly.
Figgis, see if our wheel will fit onto that small wagon, it would be perfect for us." "It fits!" Yelled the dwarf who dragged the wheel.
"As if it were the original!" "You see, mutton head? You were skeptical yesterday when I told you to take it! Mount it up! Help him, Caleb!" Within an impressively short amount of time, the wagon of the late Vera Lowenhaupt, equipped with a new wheel, was stripped of tarpaulins and any unwanted items, and was pulled from the ditch onto the road.
In an instant, all of the luggage was piled in.
After some thought, Zoltan Chivay ordered that there be room left for the children to sit.
The command was carried out with hesitation – Geralt noticed that the refugees kept their distance from the dwarves and were reluctant to give up the children.
Dandelion watched with evident disgust as two dwarves tried on clothes pulled from the corpses.
The others prowled among the carts, but found nothing they considered worthy of taking.
Zoltan Chivay whistled on his fingers, signaling it was time to end the salvaging, then he cast a professional eye over Roach, Pegasus, and Milva's black bay.
"Your horses," he said, wrinkling his nose with an air of disapproval.
"They are useless.
Figgis, Caleb, to the drawbar.
We will take it in turns.
Forwaaarrd!" *** Geralt was sure that the dwarves would have to abandon the cart when it became stuck in the muddy trails, but he was wrong.
The dwarves were as strong as bulls, and the roads leading to the forests were not too grassy or muddy.
The rain continued to fall incessantly.
Milva was sullen and moody and when she spoke, it was merely to grumble that the horses hooves might crack at any time.
Zoltan Chivay licked his lips in response, and told her he was a master at preparing horsemeat, which infuriated Milva even more.
They had maintained a regular formation, and at the centre they pulled the cart.
Zoltan marched in front of the cart, Dandelion rode next to him on Pegasus and quarrelled with the parrot.
Geralt and Milva followed, and behind them dragged the six women from Kernow.
The guide was Percival Schuttenbach, the long-nosed gnome.
Although his size and stature was smaller than that of the dwarves, he had equal the amount of strength and his agility far surpassed theirs.
During the march he ran around tirelessly, rummaging in the bushes, darting forward and disappearing, then suddenly emerging nervously, making monkey gestures from a distance giving a sign that everything was okay, they could go on.
Sometimes he would come back quickly and give a report of obstacles on the trail.
Whenever he returned, he gave the four children sitting on the cart a handful of blackberries, nuts or some kind of weird, but clearly tasty tuber.
Moving at a terribly sluggish pace, they marched for three days.
They did not stumble upon the army, and saw no smoke or fire.
However, they were not alone.
Scout Percival reported to them several times about groups of refugees hiding in the forest.
They passed several such groups, and quickly at that, because the peasants, armed with pitchforks and stakes did not encourage them to make contact.
It was suggested, however, to try to negotiate with them and leave the group of women from Kernow, but Zoltan was opposed to it and Milva supported him.
The women also did not seem very keen to leave the company.
This made it all the more strange that they behaved towards the dwarves with reserve and a certain dislike, mingled with fear, they hardly spoke at rest stops and stood on the sidelines.
Geralt attributed the behavior of the women to the tragedy they had recently survived, but he suspected that the reason for their reserve could be the fairly liberal manners of the dwarves.
Zoltan and his company swore obscenely and often and the parrot, Field Marshal Duda, had an even richer repertoire.
They sang bawdy songs, valiantly supported by Dandelion.
They spat, blew their noses in their fingers and farted loudly, which was usually followed by laughter, jokes and competitions.
They only took the trouble to go deep into the bushes for larger commissions, and for lighter ones, they did not bother to go that far.
The latter finally unnerved Milva, who strongly admonished Zoltan one morning when he took a piss on the ashes, still warm from the fire, without any concern for the audience around him.
Zoltan was taken aback at this reprimand, and said that people who hide shamefully in the bushes are informers and plotters, it makes them easily recognisable as untrustworthy and deceitful.
This eloquent justification however, had no affect on the archer.
She bombarded the dwarves with a rich medley of insults and a few specific threats for good measure.
It seemed to be highly effective, as everyone obediently and meekly started going to the toilet in the bushes.
In order to not be seen as treacherous conspirators, however, they went in groups.
The new company had completely changed Dandelion meanwhile.
The poet fit in with the dwarves like a brother, especially when it appeared that some of them had heard of him before and knew a few verses of his ballads.
Dandelion never left Zoltan's company.
He wore a quilted jacket he had acquired from the dwarves, and he had replaced his tattered feathered hat for a sable cap that made him look like a scoundrel.
In his wide copper lined belt, he had planted a knife he'd been given as a gift, giving him the look of a true rogue.
The knife had a bad habit of pricking him in the groin every time he bent forward.
Fortunately, he soon lost the assassin's dagger and didn't have another to replace it with.
They wandered among the dense forests, which covered the slopes of Turlough.
The forests seemed dead, there were no animals.
They had probably been scared by the army and fled.
There was nothing to hunt, but so far they were not threatened by hunger.
The dwarves had brought a lot of supplies.
However, there were a lot of mouths to feed, and it didn't take too long for the supplies to run out.
Munro Bruys and Yazon Yarda disappeared once it was barely dark, taking with them an empty sack.
When they returned in the morning, they had two sacks, both full.
One was filled with horse feed, the second was filled with groats, flour, dried beef, a wheel of cheese that had barely been touched, and even a huge Kindziuk, a delicacy consisting of a casing stuffed with beef offal, pressed between two tablets in the shape of bellows to stoke the fire.
Geralt could guess where the bounty had come from.
He did not comment immediately, but waited for a suitable moment.
Once he was alone with Zoltan, he asked him politely if he did not see anything wrong with robbing other refugees, no less hungry than them, and fighting for survival.
The dwarf replied seriously, that yes, he was very much ashamed, but he felt it was part of nature.
"My great vice," he explained, "Is my irrepressible goodness.
I just got to do good.
However, I'm a rational dwarf, and I know that I can't spread my kindness to all.
If I tried to be good for everyone, for the whole world and all the beings inhabiting it, it would be like a drop of drinking water in the salty sea.
In other words, a wasted effort.
I decided therefore to take solid action, so it does not go in vain.
I'm good for myself and my immediate entourage." Geralt did not ask any more questions.
*** During one of their stops, Geralt and Milva chatted longer with Zoltan Chivay, the incorrigible and compulsive altruist.
The dwarf was well informed about the course of the war or at least he gave that impression.
"The attack," he replied, trying again and again to silence Field Marshal Duda, who was now swearing loudly, "Came from Drieschot.
It began at dawn on the seventh day after Lammas.
The Verdanian army marched with Nilfgaard because Verden, as you know, is now an Imperial protectorate.
They moved at a rapid pace, leaving all the villages in ashes from Drieschot to Brugge and abolishing the army stationed there.
The Nilfgaardian Black Infantry managed to sneak across the Yaruga when they were least expected and took the fortress at Dillingen.
They built a bridge of boats in half a day, can you believe it?" "We believe anything now." Milva muttered.
"You were in Dillingen, when it began?" "We were in the area," said the dwarf evasively.
"When the news reached us of an invasion, we were already on our way to Brugge.
The roads were a terrible mess, they were full of fugitives and refugees, some leaving the South to go North, others vice versa.
They clogged the road, and we were stuck.
We got confirmation too, that Nilfgaard was both behind us and in front of us.
The ones who'd left from Drieschot had split up.
I somehow felt that a large incursion had went to the Northeast, toward the city of Brugge." "And the blacks are already now North of Turlough.
We're in the middle, on neutral ground." "In the middle," admitted the dwarf.
"But not on neutral ground.
Imperial squads are flanked by Squirrels, Verden volunteers and various other isolated groups, and they are even worse than Nilfgaardians.
They are the ones who burned Kernow, but failed to catch us, and we just about managed to escape to the forest.
We had therefore better not stick the tips of our noses out of this forest.
We should be careful.
We will reach the Old Road, then go along the river Chotla to the Ina and there we will find the Temerian army.
King Foltest's troops have probably already recovered from the surprise and will show the Nilfgaardians some resistance." "I hope so." Milva said, looking at the witcher.
"The problem is, we have urgent matters in the South.
We had thought of going South from Turlough, towards the Yaruga." "I do not know what the matters are that push you to go in that direction," Zoltan's eyes flashed at them suspiciously.
"They must be bloody important for you to risk your necks like that for them." He paused, waited a little, but no one hastened to explain.
The dwarf scratched his behind, coughed and spat.
"I would not be surprised," he said finally, "to learn Nilfgaard already holds both sides of the Yaruga and the Ina estuary in its claws.
Where exactly do you need to be on the Yaruga?" "No place in particular," Geralt decided to respond.
"Just simply at the river.
I want to find a boat to sail to the mouth." Zoltan looked at him and laughed, but stopped immediately when he realized it was no joke.
"I must admit," he said after a moment, "you are dreaming if you think you will get there.
You should give it up.
All of Southern Brugge is on fire, before you get to the Yaruga you will be impaled or sent to Nilfgaard.
Even if by some miracle you manage to get to the river, you have no chance of sailing to the mouth.
I told you about the pontoon, slung from Cintra to the shore of Brugge.
This bridge is diligently guarded day and night, and nothing crosses the river that way, except maybe the salmon.
Your important and urgent matters will have to lose their importance and urgency.
You cannot piss any higher, that's my advice." Milva's facial expression revealed that she agreed with the dwarf.
Geralt had nothing to say.
He felt very bad.
He felt a dull ache like invisible blunt teeth biting into the bones of his left forearm and right knee, the pain made worse by his fatigue and the constant humidity.
He also had a piercing, depressing, and extremely unpleasant feeling.
A strange feeling, which he had never before experienced, and one that he could not cope with.
All he felt was helplessness and resignation.
*** After two days the rain stopped, and the sun shone on his face.
Freed from the fog which had dissipated quickly, the forest breathed again and the birds went on singing, forgetting their silence during the bad weather.
Zoltan cheered and ordered a long stop, after which he promised the walk would be easier and that they would reach the Old Road in a day at most.
The women from Kernow dried their black and grey clothes on the surrounding branches, shamefully hiding in the bushes in their underwear, scoffing their meals.
The scruffy children ran about having fun, disturbing the dignified calm of the steaming forest.
Dandelion slept off his fatigue.
Milva had disappeared.
The dwarves rested, but remained active.
Figgis Merluzzo and Munro Bruys went in search of mushrooms.
Zoltan, Yazon Yarda, Caleb Stratton and Percival Schuttenbach sprawled not far from the cart and played 'Screwed', their favourite card game, to which they devoted every free moment, even on wet evenings.
The witcher sometimes sat and played with them and encouraged them, as he did now.
He still could not understand the complicated rules of the game, but he was fascinated by the cards themselves, which were beautifully and meticulously painted.
Compared to human playing cards, these were true masterpieces of printing.
Geralt once again argued that the techniques the dwarves used were strongly advanced and weren't just exclusive to mining, steel and metallurgy.
If dwarves, despite their abilities, did not hold the monopoly of the games market it was because people much preferred to play dice, also gamblers paid little interest to aesthetics.
Human gamblers, and the witcher had taken the opportunity to observe more than one, always played in crumpled boxes so dirty that before laying them on the table they had to be laboriously detached from their fingers.
The figures were painted so sloppily that it was only possible to distinguish the Lady from the Jack because the Jack sat on a horse, although the horse looked more like a lame weasel.
The images on the dwarven boxes excluded such mistakes.
The king wearing a crown was truly royal, the Lady was beautiful and seductive, and the Jack, armed with a halberd, was rakishly moustached.
In the dwarven tongue, these figures were called Hraval, Vaina and Ballet, but when Zoltan and his company played, they used the names common to humans.
The sun shone, the moisture evaporated from the forest, Geralt encouraged the players.
The basic principle of Screwed was something resembling a horse auction at market, such was the intensity and tension in the voice of the player.
The pair presenting the highest "price" tried to get as many folds as possible, while the second pair tried to prevent it in every way.
The game ran loudly and violently, and each player sat with a big club next to him.
They rarely used the clubs, but they were often waved about.
"How can you play this game, with that empty head? Are you deaf? You bid clubs, instead of hearts? What do I bid hearts and sing an operetta too? Oh, I should take my stick and whack you over your stupid noggin!" "I had four clubs and a jack, I thought I had the best bid!" "Four clubs! Unless you counted your little pecker when holding the cards in your lap.
Think a little, Stratten, its not university, it's just a card game! Even a pig could rob a mayor if he had good cards.
Deal, Varda." "Double hearts." "You little shit!" "He already played his king, and crapped his pants.
Doubleton of clubs!" "Screwed!" "You must be asleep, Caleb.
Screwed a double there! Whats your bid?" "A load of hearts!" "Raise.
Haaa! And what? Nobody screwed? Nothing to say, my lads? Open, Varda.
Percival, you blink in his direction once more, I'll punch you so hard in the eyes, you won't be able to close them till winter." "Clubs." "Queen!" "Followed by a King! Your Queen is fucked! I win and ha, ha, and I still have something I keep for a rainy day! A Jack, King, pair of ..." "And ten of trumps! He who takes advantage, we chop the....
Ah bollocks! Oi, Zoltan? You're turning soft!" "Fucking gnome.
Eh, I would take this the club and ..." Before Zoltan had a chance to pick up his club, a shrill scream came from the forest.
Geralt jumped up first.
He cursed as he ran, because once again he felt the pain through his knee.
Just behind him rushed Zoltan Chivay, seizing his sword wrapped in its skins on the cart.
Percival Schuttenbach and the rest of the dwarves ran after them, armed with their clubs and at the back Dandelion followed, who'd been awakened by the screaming.
From one side, Figgis and Munro appeared.
Throwing their baskets of mushrooms down, both dwarves caught the fleeing children.
Milva came out of nowhere, pulling an arrow from her quiver and pointing it in the direction the cry had come from.
But it wasn't necessary.
Geralt had heard it, seen it and he knew what it was.
The child that had screamed, was a freckled girl with pigtails, maybe eight or nine years old.
She was rooted to the spot a few steps in front of a pile of rotting tree trunks.
Geralt jumped up quickly, grabbed her under the arm, interrupting her wild screech, and from the corner of his eye he spotted the movement between the logs.
He retreated quickly, bumping into Zoltan and his dwarves.
Milva, who also saw the movement among the stumps, stretched her bow.
"Don't shoot," he hissed.
"Take the little one away quickly.
And get back, but take it easy.
Do not make any sudden movements." At first it seemed that it was one of the rotting logs that had moved, as if it had suddenly become animated, to escape the sunlight and seek refuge in the shadow of the trees.
It was only after a closer look it was possible to distinguish the other details, mainly four pairs of thin legs joined onto a dirty shell, mottled and divided into segments rather like armour.
"Take it easy." Repeated Geralt quietly.
"Do not provoke it.
Don't be deceived by its apparent immobility.
Its not aggressive, but it can move very quickly.
If it feels threatened, it will attack, and its venom has no antidote." The creature crawled slowly on the logs.
It watched Dandelion and the dwarves, slowly rotating, their eyes bulging, fixated.
It barely moved.
It polished the ends of its legs, lifting them one by one and carefully inspecting them, displaying its impressive, sharp mandibles.
"There was so much screaming," said Zoltan without any emotion, who was standing next to the witcher.
"That I thought it was something really terrible.
For example, the Verden cavalry, or the angi'vare.
And here we have an overgrown crustacean.
We must admit, nature can take interesting forms." "No I do not admit," said Geralt.
"That which is sitting there, is an Okoglow.
A creation of Chaos.
A dying relic from the times before the conjunction of the spheres, if you know what I mean." "Sure, I know." The dwarf looked into his eyes.
"Although I am not a witcher, I know of Chaos and such beasts.
I am just very curious as to what you will do with this relic.
Specifically, I wonder how you will do it, witcher.
Will you use your own sword or would you prefer my sihill?" "Nice sword." Geralt glanced at the sword, which Zoltan drew from its laquered scabbard and deer skins.
"But I will not need it." "Curious," Zoltan repeated.
"So we just stand here and look at it? Will the relic not feel threatened? Or maybe you want to turn back and ask the Nilfgaardians for help? What do you suggest, monster slayer?" "Get me the ladle and cauldron lid from the cart." "What?" "Do not argue with a specialist Zoltan." said Dandelion.
Percival Schuttenbach made his way to the cart and in the blink of an eye provided the required items.
The witcher winked at the company, then with all his strength began banging the spoon on the lid.
"Enough! Enough!" shouted Zoltan Chivay after a while, pressing his hands to his ears.
"You fuck, your going to damage the ladle! The shellfish has gone! He fled already, damn it!" "And how he ran!" Percival was delighted.
"Up went the dust! Its damp, and there was still dust behind him, by my beard!" "The okoglow," Geralt explained coolly, handing the dwarves back their battered kitchen utensils, "has an extremely sensitive and warped sense of hearing.
It has no ears, but it still listens so to speak, using its entire body.
In particular, the metallic sound it is not able to bear.
It feels pain when..." "Even from its bowels," Zoltan interrupted.
"I know because I also experienced this, when you started banging on the lid.
If the monster has more sensitive hearing than me, I pity him.
It will not come back here at least? Will he not bring his friends?" "I do not think many of his species are still alive.
As for this one, he will certainly not return to this area soon.
There's no need to worry." "Monsters aside," the dwarf frowned.
"Your concert with the cooking pan was probably heard from the Skellig Islands, and its possible that some music lovers are already headed this way.
It would be better if we weren't here when they arrive.
Pack up the camp boys! Hey, women, get dressed and round up the children! Come on, get moving!" When they stopped for the night, Geralt decided to finally clarify some things that had been bothering him.
Zoltan Chivay did not seem as if he intended on playing a round of cards, so the witcher found no problem in drawing him to a secluded place for a man to man chat.
He began without beating about the bush.
"Tell me, how did you know I am a witcher?" The dwarf's eyes flashed at him and he smiled slyly.
"I could brag to you about my insight.
I could say how I notice that your eyes change colour at dusk like the sun.
I could also say, that I am well travelled and have heard alot about Geralt of Rivia.
But the truth is more banal.
Do not look at me with those menacing eyes, wolf.
You are discreet, but your friend the bard sings and talks, his mouth doesn't close.
That's how I know your profession." Geralt refrained from asking the next question.
And rightly so.
"Well, okay." Said Zoltan.
"Dandelion blurted everything.
He must have felt that we appreciate honesty, and that we are sympathetic towards you.
He did not need to test us, because we do not hide our nature.
In short: I know why you must head to the South in such a hurry.
I know of the urgent and important matter that leads you to Nilfgaard.
I know who you are looking for there.
And not just because of the rumours of the poet.
I lived in Cintra before the war and heard stories about the child of surprise and the white haired witcher, bound by destiny." Geralt remained silent.
"The rest," said the dwarf, "is a matter of observation.
You are a witcher, a monster slayer, however, you let that vile beast escape.
The monster had only frightened the child, he'd done nothing wrong, so you dropped your sword, and hit the lid of a cauldron.
Because you are no longer a witcher, but a noble knight, who rushes to rescue kidnapped or oppressed virgins." The witcher still said nothing.
"You drill me with your eyes.
You are worried I will betray you.
You wonder how I will turn this secret against you.
Do not torment yourself.
We will go to the Ina together, and help each other.
We both face the same goal: to survive and move on.
In order to continue the noble mission, or to simply live, but so as not to have to be ashamed in the hour of death.
You think that everything has changed.
The world has changed.
And yet this world is, the same.
And you're the same as you were.
Do not torment yourself." "Forget separating from us." Zoltan resumed his monologue, not embarrassed by the silence of the witcher.
"Give up on your long and lonely journey to the South, through Brugge and Sodden to the Yaruga.
You have to look for another way to Nilfgaard.
If you want I will counsel you..." "No need," Geralt rubbed his knee, which after a few days the pain had still not abandoned.
"Keep your advice, Zoltan." He found Dandelion playing cards with the cheering dwarves.
Without a word, he took the poet's sleeve and pulled him into the forest.
Dandelion immediately realized what was going on, one look at the witcher's face was enough.
"Oi parrot," Geralt said quietly.
"Gossip.
Big mouth.
I should tear out your tongue, you blockhead.
You need a bit between your teeth." The troubadour was silent, but his face remained calm.
"When it was first known that you were coming with me," continued the witcher.
"Some reasonable people were astonished.
They were amazed that I would allow you to travel with me.
They advised me to take you to a lonely place, strangle you, rob you and then hide your body in the hollow of a tree under a carpet of leaves.
I really regret not having listened." "Is it revealing such a great secret, to say who you are and where you are going?" Dandelion suddenly lost his temper.
"Should we be suspicious of everyone and pretend all of the time? These dwarves ...
they are our company ..." "I do not have a company." He growled.
"I don't have one.
I do not want to have one.
I don't need it.
Do you understand?" "Sure, he understands." Milva said from behind his back.
"And I understand.
You don't need anybody, witcher.
You often show it." "I am not conducting a personal war," he turned sharply.
"These companions are unecessary to me because I'm not going to Nilfgaard to save the world, to overthrow the evil Empire.
I'm going to find Ciri.
That's why I have to go alone.
Forgive me if this sounds uncomfortable in your ears, but I do not give a damn about the rest.
And now go away.
I want to be alone." When after a while he turned round, he saw only Dandelion had gone.
"I had the dream again," he stated dryly.
"Milva, I'm losing time.
I'm losing time! She needs me.
She needs help." "Tell me," she said quietly.
"Get it out.
Even if it was terrible, tell me." "It was not terrible.
In my dream ...
She danced.
She danced in a smoky hut.
And she was, damn it, happy.
Music was playing, someone yelled ...
The whole hut shook from the cries and the music...
And she danced, danced, and stamped her feet ...
And over that damn roof shack, in the cold, night air ...
danced death.
Milva ...
Maria ...
She needs me." Milva turned her eyes.
"She's not the only one," she whispered.
So he could not hear.
*** At the next stop, the witcher showed interest in Zoltan's sword, the sihill, which he had taken a brief look at during the affair with the okoglow.
Without hesitation, the dwarf stripped the weapon of its deer skins and removed it from its sheath.
The sword measured about forty inches, and weighed no more than thirty five ounces.
The blade was covered in mysterious runic signs that gave it a bluish color and it was sharp as a razor.
With a little practice you could've shaved with it.
The handle, twelve inches long, was wrapped in strips of salamander skin, it had a cylindrical copper cap which served as a pommel, and then the hilt, although quite small, was very ornate.
"A beautiful thing." Geralt whirled the sihill, it whistled as he passed it in a flash from his left hand to his right using two fingers.
"In fact, its a pretty piece of iron." "Huh!" Percival Schuttenbach snorted.
"A piece of iron! Take a better look at it, because in a moment you will say its a piece of horseradish." "I once had a better sword." "And I don't deny that," Zoltan shrugged.
"Because inevitably it came from our forge.
You witchers, know how to brandish your swords, but do not make them.
They are only made in Mahakam, beneath Mount Carbon." "Dwarves temper the steel," added Percival, "And forge the main layers.
But we gnomes, deal with the decorative cut and sharpening.
In our workshops.
Using our Gnomish technology, as once we made our gwyhyrs, the best swords in the world." "The sword I wear now," Geralt bared his blade.
"Comes from Brokilon, from the catacombs of Craag An.
I got it from the Dryads.
It is a first-class weapon, and yet neither dwarven or gnomish.
This is an elven blade, a hundred or two hundred years old." "He has no fucking idea!" Cried the gnome, taking the sword in hand and running his fingers along the blade.
"The finish is Elven, yes.
Handle, hilt and pommel.
It also has elven etchings, engraving, and ornamentation.
But the blade was forged and sharpened in Mahakam.
And it is true that it was forged a few centuries ago, because you can easily see, the steel is inferior and the craftsmanship more primitive.
Here, put Zoltan's sihill next to it, do you see the difference?" "I see.
But mine does not give the impression of being less well made." The gnome snorted and waved his hand.
Zoltan smiled proudly.
"The cut of the blade," he explained with a magesterial tone, "and the feel of the blade, is not what differentiates it from mine.
The thing is, your sword is a simple composition of steel and iron, and the blade of my sihill has been forged from an alloy of refined graphite and borax ..." "Modern technology!" Percival could not resist, he had heated up a bit since the conversation had lead onto matters he knew well.
"The construction and composition of the blade comprise of several layers of soft core and hard steel, not the soft steel ..." "Slowly, slowly," the dwarf stopped him.
"He's not a metalurgist Schuttenbach, don't bore him with the details.
I'll explain it to him straight.
The good steel, witcher, hard steel, magnetite, is extremely difficult to sharpen.
Why? Because it is hard! When we do not have the technology, as used to be the case for us and is the case for you today, and want to get a sword with a sharp blade, you must coat the edges with a soft steel, less resistant to treatment.
Your Brokilon sword was made with this method.
Modern blades are made the opposite way - a soft core with a hard edge.
Treatment is time consuming and as I said, requires modern technology.
But the result is a blade, that can cut a cambric cravat in the air." "Can your sihill do that?" "No." The dwarf smiled.
"You can count the number of swords made like that on one hand and few of them left Mahakam.
But I guarantee that the mucky crab we crossed paths with yesterday would not have survived my sihill, the shell would not have provided much resistance.
You would have cut it to pieces without much effort." The talk of swords and metallurgy continued for some time.
Geralt listened with interest, shared his own experiences, and took the opportunity to enrich his knowledge asking about this and that, examining and testing Zoltan's sihill.
He did not know that the very next day he would have to demonstrate the theory with practice.
The first sign that people lived in the area, was a very regular stack of bark chips, which Percival Schuttenbach had spotted by the road while he was at the front of the group.
Zoltan stopped the procession and sent the gnome to scout further.
Percival disappeared, and after half an hour he returned at full speed, excited and breathless, waving from afar.
He reached them, but instead of immediately informing them, he grabbed his long nose with his fingers and blew with all his might, producing a sound reminiscent of a shephard's horn.
"Don't scare the animals!" Snapped Zoltan Chivay.
"And talk.
What's up ahead?" "A hamlet," the gnome panted, wiping his fingers on his many-pocketed overcoat.
"In the clearing.
Three cottages, a barn, a shed, a few hutches ...
A dog runs about in the yard, and the chimney smokes.
Food is being prepared, oatmeal, milk and more." "What, you were in the kitchen?" Dandelion laughed.
"You looked in the pots? How do you know it was oatmeal?" The gnome looked at him with superiority, and Zoltan snorted angrily.
"Don't insult him, poet.
He knows the smell of food a mile away.
If he says that its oatmeal, its oatmeal.
Damn, I don't even like it." "Why not? I like oatmeal.
I'd be happy to eat it." "Zoltan is right," said Milva.
"And you be quiet, Dandelion, because its not poetic.
If there's milk in the oatmeal, then there is a cow.
And any peasant, would have noticed the fumes of the fires, taken his cow and escaped into the woods.
So why does he stay? We should go into the forest, make a detour.
It smells bad to me." "Calm down, calm down," muttered the dwarf.
"We will be ready to escape if needs be.
Maybe the war is over? Maybe the Temerian army has finally advanced? How would we know in this place? Maybe there was a big battle, Nilfgaard was pushed back, maybe the front is behind us, and the peasants and their cows returned home? We need to find out.
Figgis, Munro, both of you stay here and keep your eyes open.
We will do a little reconnaissance.
If there is danger, I'll let you know with the call of the Sparrowhawk." "Call of the Sparrowhawk?" Munro Bruys anxiously played with his beard.
"But you have no idea how to imitate birdsong, Zoltan." "Exactly.
When you hear a strange noise, that you do not recognise, that'll be me.
Percival, you lead.
Geralt, you going with us?" "We'll all go." Dandelion dismounted.
"If its a trap, we'll be safer in a large group." "I'll leave Field Marshal here." Zoltan took the parrot from his shoulder and handed it to Figgis Merluzzo.
"He may decide to suddenly launch his profanities at point bank range, and our stealth approach would go to hell.
Come on." Percival quickly led them to the edge of the forest, through dense bushes of wild lilac.
Ahead of the bushes, the terrain sloped slightly, ending in a piled heap of gnarled tree stumps.
Beyond, lay a large clearing.
Milva peered cautiously.
The gnome's report had been accurate.
In the middle of the clearing there were three cottages, a barn and several hutches covered with moss.
A huge puddle of manure glistened in the yard.
The buildings and a small rectangle of grass, which was rather disheveled, were surrounded by a low fence, broken in parts.
Behind the fence, a grey dog barked.
On the roof of a cottage stood a column of smoke, lazily crawling through a hole in the thatch.
"In fact," Zoltan whispered, sniffing, "that certainly does smell tasty.
Especially since my nostrils have become accustomed to the smell of burnt forest.
I see neither guards nor horses which is reassuring, and I reckon it is a band of ruffians who have taken up refuge here.
Hmm...
I feel we have nothing to fear." "I will go." Milva declared.
"No," protested the dwarf.
"You look too much like a Squirrel.
If they see you, they may be frightened and humans tend to be unpredictable when they're scared.
Yazon and Caleb will go.
As for you, keep your bow ready to shoot, to cover them if need be.
Percival will be ready to warn the others.
Stay alert, in case we need to retreat." Yazon Varda and Caleb Stratton cautiously emerged from the thicket and moved towards the buildings.
They walked slowly, carefully looking around.
The dog saw them straight away.
He barked furiously, running around the yard, and didn't respond to the soft clicking and whistling of the dwarves.
The cabin door opened.
Milva immediately raised her bow and stretched the string smoothly.
She quickly loosened it again.
On the threshold stood a short, thin girl with long braids.
She screamed something at the dwarves, and waved her hands.
Yazon Yarda spread his hands, and shouted something back.
The girl began to scream.
Geralt and the others heard it, but they were not able to distinguish the words.
Those words must have had an impression on Yazon and Caleb, because the two dwarves turned on their heels and ran back towards the lilac bushes.
Milva stretched her bow again, moving the tip, looking for a target.
"What the devil?" barked Zoltan.
"What's going on? What made them run away like this? Did you see something, Milva?" "Shut your trap." The archer hissed, still letting her tip move from cottage to cottage, from shed to shed.
But there was still nothing to see.
The girl with the braids disappeared into the cabin, slamming the door behind her.
The dwarves raced as if all the demons of Chaos trod on their heels after them.
Yazon yelled something, maybe cursing.
Dandelion suddenly turned pale.
"He is yelling ...
Oh, mother!" "What is goi ..." Zoltan stopped because Yazon and Caleb had arrived, both red with exertion.
"What is it? Tell us!" "There is plague ..." Caleb gasped.
"Black smallpox ..." "Did you touch anything?" Zoltan Chivay retreated abruptly, almost knocking Dandelion over.
"Did you touch anything in the yard?" "No...
The dog didn't let us get close enough..." "Thanks be to that damn mutt." Zoltan raised his eyes skyward.
"May the gods grant him a long life and a pile of bones the size of Mount Carbon.
The girl in the hut, did she have pimples?" "No.
She's healthy.
The sick are lying in the last hut, the rest of her family.
Many have already died, she said.
Aye, aye, Zoltan, the wind was blowing towards us!" "Enough teeth chattering," said Milva, lowering her bow.
"If you did not touch anything infected, you will be fine, don't worry.
Indeed, thats if there really is any smallpox.
The girl may have wanted to scare you." "No," asserted Yazon, still shivering.
"Behind the hut there was a pit ...
And inside it, corpses.
The girl didn't have enough strength to bury the dead, so she threw them into the pit..." "Well!" Zoltan sniffed.
"There's your oatmeal, Dandelion.
I don't know about you, but somehow I'd rather pass.
Let's get out of here, alive." Frantic barking suddenly rose from the village.
"Hide yourselves!" The witcher hissed, kneeling.
On the opposite side of the clearing, a rowdy group of horsemen galloped around the broken fence, whistling and surrounding buildings, then burst into the yard.
The riders were armed but wore no uniforms.
On the contrary, they were casually dressed in colourful clothes, and their equipment gave the impression of being completely mismatched - not taken from the barracks, but found on the battlefield.
"Thirteen." Percival Schuttenbach counted quickly.
"Who are they?" "They aren't Nilfgaard or any other regular army," said Zoltan.
"They're not Scoia'tael either.
It seems to me, they are deserters.
A single band." "Or marauders." The riders were loud, they frolicked in the yard.
The dog received a blow from a stick and fled.
The girl with the braids jumped from the door, she yelled.
But this time the warning did not work nor was it taken seriously.
One of the riders galloped by, took her by the hair, pulled her from the threshold, and dragged her through the puddle.
Others jumped from their horses, helped to drag the girl to the end of the yard, tore off her clothes and threw her on the pile of rotten straw.
The girl fought tooth and nail, but she had no chance.
Only one of the marauders had not joined in the fun, he looked after the horses tied to the fence.
The girl began to shriek in despair.
Then the cries became less frequent, spasmodic, and finally ceased altogether.
"Warriors!" Milva broke up.
"Heroes...
bastards yes!" "Obviously they are not afraid of smallpox." Yazon Varda shook his head.
"Fear," whispered Dandelion, "is a human thing.
In them is no longer anything human." "Except their guts," Milva croaked, carefully embedding her arrow on the string.
"Which I'm about to drill through with this arrow, those villains." "There are thirteen of them," said Zoltan Chivay with a sombre look.
"And they have horses.
You can kill one or two maybe, but the rest will attack us.
Besides, it could be a detachment.
The devil knows how many could follow them." "So what, I must watch quietly, do nothing?" "No." Geralt had hung his sword around his back and had tied his hair.
"I'm sick of watching quietly.
I'm tired of inaction.
They have to be dispersed.
You see the one who's keeping the horses? When I reach there, shoot him from the saddle.
If you can, take a second.
But only when I reach there." "Then there will be eleven." The archer turned around.
"I can count." "What about the smallpox?" Muttered Zoltan Chivay.
"If you go there, you will be contaminated with plague ...
with the devil, witcher! Putting us all in danger ...
Damn it, this is not the girl you are looking for!" "Shut up, Zoltan.
Go back to the cart, hide in the forest." "I'm going with you." Milva said hoarsely.
"No.
Cover me from afar, you'll help me more effectively." "And me?" Dandelion asked.
"What shall I do?" "What you usually do.
Nothing." "You are crazy ..." Zoltan growled.
"Only you against all of them ...
What is wrong with you? You want to play the Hero, the saviour of virgins?" "Shut up." "Then let the devil take you! Wait...
Leave your sword.
There are alot of them, it's better that you do not have to cut twice.
Take my sihill.
With it, once is enough." The witcher accepted the dwarf's weapon without hesitation and without a word.
Again he pointed out to Milva, the straggler guarding the horses.
Then he jumped over the stumps and walked briskly towards the sheds.
The sun was shining.
Grasshoppers leapt from under his feet.
The rider guarding the horses saw him, and pulled a spear from its sheath by his saddle.
He had very long, matted hair, which fell onto his ragged chain mail, patched with rusty wire.
He wore new shoes with shiny buckles, they had obviously been looted recently.
The guard shouted, then from behind the fence came another marauder.
This one carried a belt with a sword around his neck and had just finished fastening his trousers.
Geralt was already quite close.
From the heap of straw he heard laughter from those entertaining themselves with the girl.
He breathed deeply, every breath in him intensifying his desire to kill.
He could have calmed himself down, but he didn't want to.
He wanted to take pleasure from this.
"Hey you, who are you? Stop!" Shouted long haired, weighing the javelin in his hands.
"What do you want?" "I'm tired of watching." "Whaaat?" "Does the name Ciri mean anything to you?" "I'll ..." The rider didn't manage to say anything more.
An arrow with grey feathers hit him in the centre of the chest and he dropped from the saddle.
Before he fell to the ground, Geralt already heard the whistle of a second arrow.
The tip hit the other soldier in the abdomen, low, right between his fingers that were holding his fly.
He howled like an animal, bent in half and fell back over the fence, knocking over and breaking the poles.
Before the others had time to turn and sieze their weapons, the witcher was already among them.
The dwarf's sword danced and sang, its song was as light as a feather and its razor sharp steel revealed its wild lust for blood.
The bodies it cut offered almost no resistance.
The blood spurted on his face, he did not have time to wipe it.
Even if the deserters had harboured intentions of fighting back, the sight of the falling corpses and streams of blood effectively discouraged them.
One of them, with his pants around his knees, did not even have time to pull them up.
He was slashed in the carotid artery and fell on his back, with his appendage waving ridiculously, his masculinity left unsatisfied.
A second rider, his head cleanly shaven, tried to protect his face with both hands, and immediately the sihill cut both of his wrists.
The others fled, scattering in different directions.
The witcher chased them, mentally cursing the pain, which had again manifested in his knee.
He hoped that his leg would not refuse to obey him.
Two managed to reach the fence, and tried to defend themselves, waving their swords.
Paralysed with terror, they were sluggish.
The witcher's face was once again splashed with the blood that gushed from the arteries cut by the dwarven blade.
The others used this time to escape and jump on their horses.
One immediately fell, struck by an arrow, wriggling and flapping like a fish thrown out of the net.
The two that were left, launched their horses into a full gallop.
However, only one managed to escape, because Zoltan Chivay suddenly appeared on the battlefield.
The dwarf whirled his axe and threw it, hitting one of the fleeing riders in the middle of the back.
The marauder roared, and flew from the saddle, kicking his legs.
The last clung to his horse's neck, cleared the ditch full of corpses and galloped down towards the road.
"Milva!" The witcher and dwarf cried simultaneously.
The archer was already running towards him.
She stopped, frozen with her legs apart.
She lowered her bow and tightened the arch, raising it higher and higher.
They heard the sound of the chord, but Milva had not changed position, she had not even twitched.
They only saw the arrow when it had reached its target.
The rider slumped forward on his horse, the feathered projectile protruding from his shoulder.
But he did not fall.
He straightened up and with a cry, pushed his horse into a faster gallop.
"What a bow." Zoltan Chivay groaned in awe.
"And what a shot!" "A shot of shit." The witcher wiped the blood from his face.
"The son-of-a-bitch has escaped and he'll bring more." "She hit him! And it was fired from two hundred steps!" "She could have aimed for the horse." "The horse is not guilty." Milva snorted angrily, walking up to them.
She spat, watching the rider disappearing into the forest.
"I missed the miserable scoundrel because I was a little breathless...
Pah, poisonous snake, run away with my tip! May it curse you!" They heard a whinny from the road and immediately after, the piercing howl of a murdered man.
"Ho, ho!" Zoltan looked at the archer with admiration.
"He did not get far! Your arrow didn't fail! Was it poisoned? Or was it magical? Because after all, even if the rogue had caught smallpox, the damn disease doesn't spread that fast!" "It wasn't my arrow." Milva gave the witcher a knowing look.
"It wasn't smallpox either.
But I think I know what it was." "I think I know too." The dwarf bit his moustache, smiling mischieviously.
"I always noticed that you look behind you, I know there is someone following us on the sly.
On a chestnut stallion.
I do not know who he is, but since you didn't mind ...
well, its not my business." "Especially since we benefit from such a rear guard." Milva said, looking meaningfully at Geralt.
"Are you certain that this Cahir is your enemy?" The witcher did not answer.
He handed Zoltan his sword.
"Thanks.
It's not bad." "Especially in such good hands," the dwarf approved, with a smile on his face.
"I've heard stories about witchers, but to overcome eight people in less than two minutes ..." "That's not something to be proud of.
They did not know how to defend themselves." The girl with braids rose onto all fours, then stood on her feet, and with shaking hands tried unsuccessfully to improve the remnants of her torn garments.
The witcher was surprised, seeing that in general, she was in absolutely no way similar to Ciri, when only a moment before he swore she looked like her twin sister.
With an uncoordinated movement the girl rubbed her face, and moved unsteadily towards the cottage, not avoiding the puddle of manure.
"Hey, wait," called Milva.
"Hey, you ...
Can we help you? Oi!" The girl did not even look at her.
She stumbled over the threshold, almost falling, holding onto the frame.
She slammed the door behind her.
"The gratitude of man knows no bounds," said the dwarf.
Milva turned like a spring, her face frozen.
"What is there to be grateful for?" "Yes." The witcher said.
"What is there?" "The marauder's horses," Zoltan did not lower his eyes.
"She can kill them for their meat, and won't have to kill the cow.
She is resistant to smallpox apparently, and now will not have to fear hunger.
She'll survive.
And the fact that thanks to you her torture was shortened, and the cottages weren't set on fire.
She will understand after a few days, when she's had time to gather her thoughts.
Come on, let's get away, before the pestilence blows our way...
Hey, witcher, where are you going? Searching for gratitude?" "No.
Some boots," said Geralt coldly, bending over the long-haired straggler, who's dead eyes were fixed at the sky.
"Looks like these will fit me perfectly." *** Over the next few days, they ate horse meat.
The boots with shiny buckles were quite comfortable.
The Nilfgaardian called Cahir still rode behind them on his chestnut stallion, but the witcher did not look back.
He finally figured out the secrets of Screwed and even played with the Dwarves.
He lost.
They did not mention what happened in the forest clearing.
There was no point.
Mandrake a.
rare, plant species from the nightshade family, which includes herbaceous plants, stems, the roots of the tuber show similarities with the human form.
The leaves are gathered in a rosette.
M.
autumnalis a.
officinalis, grown on a small scale in Vicaro, Rowan and Ymlac it seldom grows wild.
The berries are green, then turn yellow and are eaten with vinegar and pepper; the leaves are use in their raw state.
The root (radix mandragorae) is today valued in medicine and pharmacy.
Previously it once held great importance in certain superstitious beliefs, especially among the people of the North; they carved human figures on them (alruniki, alraune) and then stored them in homes as a valued talisman.
It was considered as protection against disease and in the process provided happiness and fertility to women to ensure easy births.
They were worn in clothes and during the new moon were placed into new clothes.
The root of the mandrake was a popular trade commodity, whose price could reach up to sixty florens apiece.
In trade it was often out of ignorance or fraudulent intent mistaken for belladonna root.
Mandrake was also used in witchcraft as a magical ingredient in elixirs as well as poisons.
The superstition came during the time of the persecution of the witches.
The preparation of the mandrake poison was being investigated in the trial of Lucracia Migo.
It is also assumed that the legendary Philippa Eilhart also used the mandrake as a poison.
Effenberg and Talbot Encyclopaedia Maxima Mundi, Vol XI 

