Chapter Three 

The old road had changed somewhat since the witcher had travelled it last.
The road, once paved with flat basalt slabs, built by the elves and dwarves hundreds of years ago, had become a ruin of pocked marks and corroded holes.
Sometimes, the open holes were so deep they resembled small quarries.
The marching pace slowed down, the dwarven cart maneuvered among the holes with great difficulty, getting stuck again and again.
Zoltan Chivay knew the cause of the devastation of the road.
After the last war with Nilfgaard, there was an extreme increased in demand for building materials.
People then realized that the old road had a near inexhaustible source of hewn stone.
And since the route was carelessly located in the wilderness and the road led from nowhere to nowhere, it had long ago lost its importance for transport and severed little use, they ravaged it without mercy, without measure.
'All your big cities,' complained the dwarf between the loud rasping of his parrot, 'are built on ours and the elves foundations.
The smaller towns and castles you have built yourselves, but you continue to take our stones.
All this time, it was thanks to us non-humans for your development and progress.' Geralt said nothing.
'But you destroy even this.' Zoltan cursed, shaking his head and helped move the cart around another of the holes.
'Why are you not removing the stones gradually from the ends of the road? You are like children! Instead of eating the whole donut, as is right and proper, you just lick the jam from the inside and discard the rest, because it was not as tasty.' Geralt explained that this was the fault of political geography.
The western end of the old road was located in Brugge, the eastern in Temeria and the middle in Sodden, every kingdom devastated their part as they needed it.
In response, Zoltan obscenely described a place where they could remove the kings and their politics.
Field Marshal Duda added something offensive about the royal mothers.
The further along they went, the worse it got.
Zoltan's comparison to the donut and the jam turned out to be increasingly less relevant – the road looked like a yeast cake, which had been laboriously gouged of all its raisins and almonds.
It seemed that they approached the inevitable moment when the cart would break down or become stuck in a hole for good.
They were saved, however, by something that had destroyed the old road.
They encountered a paved path running to the south that had been opened by the heavy carts carrying the timber from the forests.
Zoltan rejoiced, because according to him the path led to one of the forts on the river Ina.
He hoped to meet the army already there.
The dwarf firmly believed that, as in the previous war just behind the Ina, the army at Sodden would launch a devastating counter-attack from the Northern Kingdoms, after which the remnants of the broken and miserable Nilfgaard army would cross back over the Yaruga.
And indeed, changing the direction of their journey once again brought the war in sight.
At night the sky glowed bright red in front of them, during the day columns of smoke lined the horizon.
Since they could not be sure who was beating and burning and who was beaten and burned, they advanced cautiously, and sent Percival Schuttenbach ahead to investigate.
One morning they experienced a surprise: they found a riderless horse, a chestnut stallion.
Its green saddle had the embroidery of Nilfgaard and was covered in dark blood stains.
It was impossible to know whether it was the blood of the slain rider or whether it was shed later when the horse had a new owner.
'Well the problem is ended.' Milva said, looking at Geralt.
'If there was a problem.' 'The real problem is that we do not know who the rider was, who was thrown from the saddle.' Zoltan murmured.
'And that they do not follow in our tracks or those of our strange rear guard.' 'He is a Nilfgaardian.' Geralt clenched his teeth.
'His accent was barely noticeable, but some refugees hiding in the woods, may have recognized...' Milva looked down.
'I should have killed him then, witcher.' She said quietly.
'He would have had a lighter death.' 'He escaped from the coffin,' Dandelion nodded, looking at Geralt meaningfully, 'just to rot in a ditch.' Thus was pronounced the epitaph to Cahir, the son of Ceallach, the Nilfgaardian who emerged from a coffin, who claimed that he was not Nilfgaardian.
They spoke about him no more.
Geralt - despite repeated threats – decided to keep the chestnut and threw Zoltan Chivay into the saddle.
Although the dwarf's legs were not long enough to reach the stirrups, the stallion was obedient and quiet and he rode on him quiet comfortably.
*** At night, the horizon still shone red and during the day the smoke rose in ribbons into the sky, dirtying the blue.
Soon they came across burned buildings; the fire still crawled over the ridges and charred beams.
Next to the ruins sat eight people and five dogs.
They were all devouring the carcass of a partly charred horse.
At the sight of the armed dwarves, they abandoned their feast in a panic.
Only one man and a dog remained, neither of which showed any terror, they continued to tear flesh from the ribcage of the carrion.
Zoltan and Percival tried to interrogate the man, but failed to learn anything.
The man only groaned, shuddered, put his head between his arms and continued to strip the bones of its remains.
The dog barked and bared its teeth to the gums.
The body of the dead horse gave off a disgusting stench.
They did not risk abandoning the path, which soon led them to another burning ruin.
The fire had been set to a fairly large village, around which there must have been a skirmish because next to the smoldering ruins was a fresh burial mound.
Some distance from the mound near the road side stood an oak.
On the branches hung acorns.
And people.
'We have to look.' Zoltan Chivay decided, putting an end to discussions about risks and dangers.
'Let's get closer.' 'Why the hell,' Dandelion raised his voice, 'do you want to look at those hanged men, Zoltan? For loot? I can see from here that they have no boots.' 'You're an idiot.
This is not about the boots, but the military situation.
The developments in the theater of military operations.
What are you laughing at? You are a poet, you don't know about strategy.' 'I hate to disappoint you, but I do know.' 'And I tell you, you wouldn't know strategy if it jumped out of the bushes and kicked you in the ass.' 'You're right.
Strategy, which jumps out of the bushes, I leave to dwarves.
And hanging from an oak, too.' Zoltan waved his hand and walked to the tree.
Dandelion who could not resist his curiosity, spurred on Pegasus, and went after the dwarf.
Geralt, after a moment's reflection, followed them.
Milva trailed after him.
The crows that were feeding on the corpses reluctantly rose into the air, squawking and rustling their feathers.
Some flew off in the direction of the forest; others simply moved to the higher branches of the huge tree, watching with interest from the shoulder of the dwarf, Field Marshal Duda obscenely insulted their mothers.
On the first of the seven hanged was a board around his neck with the inscription: "Traitor to the Nation".
From the second hung the sign "Collaborator", the third "Elf Snitch", the forth "Deserter".
The fifth was a woman wearing only underwear, torn and bloody, her board read "Nilfgaard whore".
Two of the men did not have boards and could it could only be inferred that they were hung by chance.
'Good news.' Zoltan Chivay rejoiced, pointing to the boards.
'See? Our army has passed this way.
Our gallant boys have gone on the offensive and repelled the aggressors.
And they had, so I see, plenty of time for rest and entertainment.' 'And what does this mean for us?' 'That the front has already moved, and separates us from Nilfgaard's army.
We're safe.' 'And the smoke in front of us?' 'Those are ours.' The dwarf said.
'Burning the villages where the squirrels were given aid.
We are already behind the front, I tell you.
From this crossroads the southern route leads straight to Ameria, the fort in between the Chotla and the Ina.
The way looks good, we can continue.
We no longer have to fear the Nilfgaardians, we are safe.' 'There is no smoke without fire.' Milva said.
'And where there is fire there is something to be burned.
I think it is stupid to rush towards the fire.
It is stupid and careless to stay on the road, where at any moment we could be surprised by riders.
Let's go back to the woods.' 'The army of Sodden went this way.' The dwarf insisted.
'We are behind the front.
We should not be afraid to travel he road, and if we do come across an army, it will be ours.' 'Risky.' The archer shook her head.
'Were you such a soldier and a strategist, Zoltan, you'd know that the Nilfgaardian cavalry make forays into their opponents outposts.
It is possible that there are terrorists here.
But we do not know what lies ahead.
To the south, the sky is black with smoke; the army burns it way to Ameria.
And we're not behind the font, but at the front.
We could run into troops from both sides, deserters, looters or the Scoia'tael.
Let's go to the Chotla, but along the forest paths.' 'You're right,' supported Dandelion, 'I also don't like those smoke clouds.
Even if Temeria went on the offensive, before us may be Nilfgaardian units.
The Black ones penetrate deep into enemy territory.
Together with the Scoia'tael, raiding, burning, killing, causing confusion and panic and then turning back.
I remember what happened in Upper Sodden during the previous war.
I believe we should continue through the forest.
The forest will be safer.' 'I wouldn't be so sure.' Geralt said pointing at the last hanged man, who, although hung high, his calf was torn to shreds and in place of his feet, there were only stumps with bones sticking out.
'Look.
A ghoul did that.' 'Monsters?' Zoltan Chivay stopped and spat.
'A corpse eater?' 'Exactly.
We will need to guard well at night.' 'KRR-rrwa mother!' Field Marshal Duda croaked.
'You took the word right out of my mouth, bird.' Zoltan frowned.
'So we have a dilemma.
What do we do? Go into the woods, where there are ghouls, or take the road, where there are troops and marauders?' 'Into the woods.' Milva said with conviction.
'And the denser the better.
I prefer ghouls to men.' *** They travelled the forest, initially cautious, tense, and alert and responded to every rustle in the undergrowth.
Soon, however, they regained their countenance, humor and their former pace.
They did not see any ghouls, or the slightest trace of their existence.
Zoltan joked that all the monsters and demons that had eyes, had learned of the approaching army and seen the action of what the volunteers of Vergen had done to the deserters and fled into the deepest wilderness, where they were hiding in fear and chattering teeth.
'They need to guard their wives and daughters.' Milva growled.
'The monsters are aware that there are horny soldiers in the procession, and they would not let even a sheep pass.
And if they put clothing on a willow tree, it would be just them and the knot hole.' Dandelion, who had no longer lost his humour and talkativeness, tightened the strings on his lute and began to compose a couplet to the use of willows, lustful soldiers and knot holes; the dwarf and the parrot competed in helping with the rhymes.
*** 'O.' Zoltan said.
'What? Where?' Dandelion asked, while standing in his stirrups and looking into the gorge in the direction the dwarf was looking.
"I don't see anything!' 'O.' 'Don't talk like your parrot! O, what?' 'The river.' Zoltan replied calmly.
'It flows into the Chotla.
It is called O.' 'Ahh...' 'Oh, no!' Percival Schuttenbach laughed, shaking his head.
'A flows into the Chotla upstream, well away from here.
This is O, not A.' The ravine, through which the river, with the complicated name ran, was overgrown with nettles which reached above the heads of the dwarves, they had an overwhelming smell of mint and rotten wood and resounded with the constant croaking of frogs.
It also had very steep slopes, which proved to be disastrous.
The old cart which had until now bravely endured all obstacles and potholes, ended its journey on the banks of the river O.
It slipped from the hands of the dwarves, rolling down the hit to the bottom of the ravine, where it shattered into pieces.
'Rrrrurr... Mother!' Field Marshal Duda croaked, creating a chorus counterpoint to Zoltan and his company.
*** 'Truth be told,' Dandelion said, eyeing the remains of the cart and the luggage strewn about it.
'It was a happy accident.
Your creaky cart was slowing down the march.
Face it Zoltan, we have been lucky as hell that nobody has discovered or pursued us.
If we had to run, we could do nothing but leave the cart with all of your packs and sacks.
' The dwarf snorted angrily into his beard, but surprisingly Percival Schuttenbach supported the troubadour.
Support, the witcher saw, which was accompanied by several significant winks.
It was assumed the winks were to be stealthy, but the exaggerated pantomime of the little gnome's face excluded discretion.
'The poet is right.' Percival said, grimacing and blinking.
'We are near the fork between the Chotla and Ina.
Before us lies Fen Carn, with the same rough terrain.
Passing it would be difficult with the cart.
And if we were to meet up with the Temerian army over the Ina, with our cargo... We could have trouble.' Zoltan rubbed his nose, thinking.
'Well, good.' He said finally, looking at the remains of the cart, floating down the river on a lazy current.
'We'll separate.
Munro, Figgis, Caleb and Yazon will stay here.
The rest of us will continue.
We will have to load the horses with provisions and equipment.
Munro, you know what to do? You have shovels?' 'We do.' 'Do not leave any trace! Mark the spot secretly! And do not forget where you hid everything!' 'Rest assured.' 'Catch up to us when you can.' Zoltan tucked his hatchet into his belt and threw his backpack over his shoulder along with Sihil.
'We are crossing over O, then along the Chotla to Ina.
Farewell.' 'Interesting.' Milva muttered to Geralt, when their weakened squad departed on the road, waving farewell to the four dwarves left behind.
'I wonder what was in those boxes, that they needed to bury them and mark the place.
And so that none of us saw.' 'It's not our business.' 'I don't think,' Dandelion said softly while carefully guiding Pegasus among the fallen trunks, 'that the boxes contained clean underwear.
They had high expectations for that shipment.
I've talked to them on many evenings to know what they are hiding.' 'And what might they be hiding, in your opinion?' 'Their future.' The poet looked to see if anyone was listening.
'Percival is a professional gem cutter; he wants to set up his own workshop.
Figgis and Yazon are blacksmiths, and spoke of a forge.
Caleb Stratton wants to get married but his bride's parents expelled him once for being penniless.
And Zoltan...' 'Stop, Dandelion.
Gossiping is for women.' 'I apologize, Milva.' 'There is no need to.' Once they cross the river, the dark damp strip of trees became more spares and turned into low birch trees and dry grassland.
Despite this, they rode slowly.
They followed the example of Milva, who immediately after leaving the forest, place a freckled little girl with braids into her saddle.
Dandelion also seated a child on Pegasus, and Zoltan, took two on his chestnut stallion, as he walked alongside holding the reins.
But the pace did not increase; the women of Kernow were in no condition to go faster.
*** It was almost evening, when after hours of wandering among the gorges and ravines, Zoltan Chivay stopped and exchanged a few words with Percival Schuttenbach, after which he turned to the rest of the company.
'Do not worry and do not laugh at me.' He said.
'But it seems that I have gotten us lost.
I don't know, dammit, where we are or which way to go.' 'Don't talk nonsense.' Dandelion exclaimed angrily.
'What do you mean you don't know? After all, we are following the course of the stream.
And there in the ravine, is your river O.
Am I right?' 'You are.
But note which direction it flows.' 'Damn.
That's impossible!' 'It's possible.' Milva said grimly, patiently pulling dry leaves and pine needles from the hair of the girl with freckles, who she was carrying on her horse.
'All the turns have confused use.
We have turned in the wrong direction.' 'But it is still the river O.' Dandelion repeated stubbornly.
'If we stay with it we can't get lost.
The river will meander, and twist, but eventually it will empty into an estuary.
It is the order of the world.' 'Do not play smart, singer.' Zoltan wrinkled his nose.
'Shut your mouth.
Can't you see I'm thinking?' 'No, there's nothing to suggest it.
I tell you again, if we keep to the river, and then...' 'Stop babbling.' Milva growled.
'You're a city rat.
Your world order is enclosed by stone walls; the cobbled streets of your views may be worth something.
But look around! Valleys and ravines, steep and overgrown banks.
How do we keep to the river? After the ravine slopes down into scrub and swamp, then up again, then down and then back up? Try it a few times without dropping the reins.
We have women and children, Dandelion.
And evening is coming.' 'I noticed.
I will be silent.
Let us hear what you propose as someone who is familiar with the forest.' Zoltan slapped the parrot on the head, cursing, his finger got caught in a lock of his beard, he pulled at it furiously.
'Percival?' 'We roughly know the desired direction.' The gnome looked at the sun, hanging just above the treetops.
'The first proposal is this: We turn around and walk away from the mud to dry ground and go through Fen Carn, following the river to the Chotla.' 'What about the other plan?' 'The O is shallow.
Although after the recent rains it carries more water than normal, it can be easily forded.
We move onto the opposite shore.
Following the direction of the sun we will come to the junction of the Chotla and Ina.' 'No.' said the witcher.
'The second plan I have definitely ruled out.
Nor should you think about it.
After the second bank we would sooner or later end up in the mossy forests.
That is an ugly place.
My advice is to avoid it.' 'You know these places? You've been there before? You know how to get there?' The witcher rubbed his forehead, taking his time to answer.
'I've been there once,' he recalled in a low voice.
'Three years ago.
I came from the opposite side, from the east.
I was going to Brugge and I wanted to shorten the path.
How I escaped from there, I don't remember.
I was brought out half-dead on a cart.' The dwarf stared at him for a while, but did not ask any more questions.
They turned back in silence.
The women from Kernow walked with difficulty, stumbling and supporting the children, but none make a word of complaint.
Milva rode alongside the witcher, the little girl with the braids asleep in her arms.
'If I understand,' she said, 'something in those woods three years ago, almost ended your life.
You've a dangerous craft, Geralt.' 'I can not deny it.' 'I know what happened back then,' boasted Dandelion.
'You were seriously wounded, a carter drove you out.
At his family's farm you later found Ciri.
Yennefer told me.' At the sound of that name, Milva smiled slightly.
This did not escape the attention of Geralt.
He decided that when the next time they camped he would box Dandelion's ears for his uncontrollable tongue.
Knowing the poet, it would have no effect; especially considering Dandelion sung everything he knew.
'Maybe we made a mistake by not going through the moss forests,' Milva mussed aloud.
'Maybe you could have found your girl... The elves believe that if you re-visit a place where something important happened, you may repeat the event... They call it... Dammit, I forgot.
Noose of fate?' 'The loop.' Geralt corrected her.
'The loop of destiny.' 'Ugh!' Dandelion spat, 'can you stop talking about relationships and ropes.
Once an elf, from the valley of flowers foretold that I was going to hang from a gallows.
I certainly do not believe in these cheap prophecies, but two days ago I dreamed I hanged.
I woke up completely covered in sweat, I couldn't swallow or catch my breath.
So do not be surprised now that I don't like listening to talk of the gallows.' 'I was not talking to you, but to the witcher.' Milva said.
'And close your ears, so you don't trap any bugs.
Well, Geralt? What do you think of the loop of destiny? If you went into the mossy forest would the event repeat?' 'It is well we turned back.' He answered curtly.
'I do not have the slightest desire to repeat that nightmare.' *** 'You're welcome.' Zoltan shook his head while looking around.
'We've gotten to a charming place, Percival.' 'Fen Carn,' muttered the gnome, scratching the tip of his long nose.
'The Meadow of the Tombs... I always wondered where the name came from...' 'Now you know.' The broad valley before them was covered in the evening mist.
As far as the eye could see, the haze covered a sea of ancient burial mounds and worn boulders.
Some of the boulders were the usual shapeless lumps.
Others, the menhirs and obelisks, were evenly hewn and squared.
Still others, standing closer to the center of the stone forest, were grouped in circles, in a way that excluded the accidental work of nature.
'Certainly,' continued the dwarf.
'A charming place to spend the night.
An elf cemetery.
If I remembered correctly, the witcher, recently mentioned ghouls? Well, know that I can feel them among those tombs.
There must be everything.
Ghouls, graviers, vampires, devourers, even elven spirits, the entire troop.
All in there.
And you know what they are whispering now? There is no need to fetch dinner because it has already come.' 'Why don't we turn around?' Dandelion suggested anxiously.
'Let's run away while there is still light?' 'I am also of the same opinion.' 'The women are stumbling,' Milva said angrily.
'The children fall from their arms.
The horses are tired.
We must stop, Zoltan, you said before only another half a mile, a mile and a half ago, they need to rest.
And now what? You want them to walk a mile back? Shit! Cemetery or no cemetery, they'll spend the night were they are!' 'Of course,' Geralt supported the girl, while he dismounted.
'Don't panic.
Not all necropolises are just swarms of monsters and ghosts.
Fen Carn, while I've never been here, if something dangerous had occurred, I would have heard about it.' No one made a comment, not even Field Marshal Duda.
The Kernow women took their children, sat down in a tight crowd, silent and clearly frightened.
Percival and Dandelion tethered the horse and let them to graze on lush grass.
Geralt, Zoltan and Milva approached the edge of the meadow, watching the cemetery that sank into the shadows and mists.
'To make matters worse, today the moon is full,' muttered the dwarf.
'Oh, tonight will be a feast for the ghouls, I can feel it, oh we are going to give... What is that shining in the south? A kind of glow?' 'You know that glow,' Geralt said.
'Again, someone had lit thatched roofs over somebody's head.
You know what, Zoltan? Somehow I feel safer here in Fen Carn.' 'I feel it to, but when the sun is up.
Hopefully the ghouls let us live up till dawn.' Milva fumbled in her saddlebags and pulled out something shiny.
'A silver arrow head.' She explained to them.
'I saved it for just this occasion.
It cost me five crowns in the bazaar.
Can such a thing kill a ghoul, witcher?' 'I don't think there are ghouls.' 'You said so yourself,' Zoltan snapped.
'That the hanged man on the oak was eaten by ghouls.
And we are in a cemetery now, where there are ghouls.' 'Not always.' 'I'll hold you to your word.
You're a witcher, a specialist, you'll defend us from them, I hope.
Do these ghouls fight better than marauders?' 'You can't compare them.
I asked you not to panic.' 'Will this be enough for a vampire?' Milva turned the silver tip, running her thumb along it to make sure it was sharp.
'Or a spirit?' 'It might work.' 'On my Sihil,' Zoltan growled, barring his sword, 'are etched dwarven runes to an ancient dwarven spell.
Any ghoul that gets within the reach of my sword will remember me.
You'll see.' 'Ha.' Dandelion exclaimed who during their conversation had approached them.
'So there are the famous secret dwarven runes.
What is on the sword?' '"Go fuck the motherfuckers."' 'Something is moving between the stones!' Percival suddenly shouted.
'Ghoul, ghoul!' 'Where?' 'There, there! It is hiding behind the rocks!' 'One?' 'I saw only one!' 'It must be hungry as hell to try and get us before night.' The dwarf spat on his hands and grabbed the hilt of Sihil.
'Ha! Now they will know that gluttony leads to destruction! Milva, tuck an arrow in his ass and I'll bag the guts!' 'I see nothing there,' Milva whispered with the fletching of the arrow resting on her cheek.
'Nothing but the weeds among the rocks are moving.
Could you be mistaken, gnome?' 'No,' protested Percival.
'Do you see that boulder that looks like a broken table? The ghoul is hidden there, behind that rock.' 'Stay here.' Geralt, with a quick movement drew the sword from the sheath on his back.
'Look after the women and care for the horses.
If the ghoul attacks the horses will go crazy.
I will go and check it to see what it is.' 'You're not going alone,' said Zoltan.
'The other day in the meadow, I left because I was scared of smallpox.
I could not sleep for two nights from the shame.
Never again! Percival, where are you going? To the rear? You are the one who saw the ghoul, now you can take the vanguard.
Don't be afraid, I'm right behind you.' They stepped carefully among the mounds.
They tried to make as little noise in the weeds, which reached above Geralt's knees, and the dwarf and gnomes waists.
As they approached the dolmen, they split up, making it impossible for the ghoul to escape.
But their strategy was futile.
Geralt knew this would happen: his medallion had not wavered at all.
'There is no one,' Zoltan said, looking around.
'Not a soul.
It was a hallucination, Percival.
A false alarm.
You've stirred up fear where none was needed; you really do deserve a kick in the ass.' 'I saw it!' The gnome persisted.
'I saw it jump between the rocks! He was thin and black as a tax collector...' 'Shut up, stupid gnome, because of you...' 'What is that strange odor?' Geralt asked suddenly.
'Do you notice it?' 'You're right.' Said the dwarf, sniffing like a bloodhound.
'It smells weird.' 'Herbs.' Said Percival, sucking in air through his long sensitive nose.
'Wormwood, basil, sage, anise... Cinnamon? What the hell?' 'How do ghouls smell, Geralt?' 'Like carrion.' The witcher looked around quickly, looking for tracks in the grass, then with a few quick steps he returned to the dolmen and tapped the hilt of his sword on the stone.
'Come out,' he said through clenched teeth.
'I know you are in there.
Hurry up, otherwise I'll stab my sword through the hole.' From a perfectly camouflaged pit under the dolmen came a quiet scratching.
'Come out,' repeated Geralt.
'I won't hurt you.' 'Not one hair on your head will fall,' Zoltan assured in a sweet voice, but with a bloodthirsty look in his eyes, as he reached over his shoulder to grab Sihil.
'There is nothing to worry about.' Geralt shook his head and with a determined gesture order him back.
From the hole below the dolmen, came the sound of scratching again and the strong sent of herbs and roots.
After a minute they saw grey-streaked hair followed by a noble face with an impressively crooked nose, which did not belong to a ghoul, but a thin middle-aged man.
Percival was not mistaken.
The man did in fact look like a tax collector.
'I can go without fear?' He asked, lifting his black eyes under shaggy greying eyebrows to Geralt.
'You can.' The man scrambled out of the hole, brushed his black coat, tied at the waist with something resembling an apron, straighten his canvas bag, causing another wave of herbal scents.
'Gentlemen, I propose that you put away your weapons,' he said in a calm voice, his eyes searching the surroundings.
'You will not need them.
As you can see, I do not wear a sword.
I never do.
I also do not carry anything of worth in my pouch.
My name is Emiel Regis.
I come from Dillingen.
I am a surgeon.' 'Of course,' Zoltan Chivay grimaced slightly.
'Herbalist, barber or surgeon.
No offence, but you smell like an apothecary.' Emiel Regis smiled a thin-lipped smile and raised his hands apologetically.
'The smell gave you away, sir surgeon,' said Geralt, sliding his sword into its sheath.
'Did you have a specific reason why you were hiding from us?' 'Specific?' The man turned his black eyes on him.
'No.
Rather a general one.
I was simply afraid of you.
Such are the times.' 'True enough.' The dwarf nodded and pointed with his thumb at the glowing sky.
'Such are the times.
I imagine you are a refugee, like us.
Curious, however that you ran so far from your home town of Dillingen just to hide here, to conceal yourself among the graves.
Well in war, life can become quite a jumble.
You've frightened us, and we you.
Fear has big eyes.' 'For my part,' the man who had introduced himself as Emiel Regis did not look up at them.
'There is no threat.
I hope the reverse is true.' 'What do you take us for, footpads?' Zoltan's beard bristled.
'We, sir surgeon, we are also refugees.
We are heading towards the Temerian border.
If you wish, you can join us.
The more the merrier, and it is safer than being alone, and a medic could come in handy.
We are accompanied by women and children.
You don't happen to have medicines in that stinking bag you carry for skinned feet?' 'Something can be found,' the surgeon said quietly.
'I will help as I can.
As to journeying together, I appreciate the offer, but I'm not a refugee, gentlemen.
I did not flee Dillingen because of the war, I live here.' 'What?' The dwarf took an involuntary step back.
'You live here? Here, in the cemetery?' 'The cemetery? Not exactly, I have a hut not far from here.
In addition to my house and shop in Dillingen, of course.
But I spend the summer here, every year, from June to September, from the solstice to the equinox.
I collect medicinal herbs and roots and distill elixirs here...' 'You know about the war,' said Geralt, 'even though you live in a remote area, away from the world and its people.
How?' 'From the refugees that have passed through.
Less than two miles from here along the river Chotla, there is a large camp.
Grouped there are a couple of hundred refugees, the villagers of Sodden and Brugge.' 'And the Temerian troops?' Zoltan said interested.
'Are they moving forward?' 'I don't know about that.' The dwarf cursed and then squinted at their new acquaintance.
'So you live here, Mister Regis.' He drawled.
'And during the night walk among the graves.
Are you not afraid?' 'Why would I be afraid?' 'This gentleman here,' Zoltan pointed to Geralt, 'is a witcher.
He saw signs of ghouls.
Walking corpses, do you understand? And it is known that ghouls tend to be the residents of cemeteries.' 'A witcher,' the surgeon looked at Geralt with undisguised curiosity.
'A slayer of monsters.
Well that is interesting.
Explain to your companions, Sir Witcher, that this necropolis is over a half a millennium old.
As for food, ghouls aren't picky, but after five hundred years of chewing on old bones, they have left.' 'That is one less worry.' Zoltan said, looking around.
'Well, Sir Surgeon let me invite you back to our camp.
Do you like cold horse meat?' Regis looked at them thoughtfully.
'Thank you,' he said gravely.
'But I have a better idea.
I invite you to my house.
My summer home is more than a hut, rather a cabin.
It is small though so you'll have to sleep under the stars.
But next to the cabin is a spring with drinking water.
And a fireplace where we can heat the horse meat.' 'We accept with pleasure.' The dwarf bowed.
'There may not be ghouls here, but the thought of spending the night in a cemetery doesn't appeal to me.
Come on, we'll introduce you to the rest of our company.' As they approached the camp, the horses snorted and beat the ground with their hooves.
'Stand a little upwind, Mister Regis.' Zoltan threw the medic a meaningful look.
'The smell of sage frightens the mounts, and to me, I'm ashamed to admit it, I associate it with pulling teeth.' *** 'Geralt,' murmured Zoltan as Emiel Regis disappeared behind a hanging curtain, which substituted as a door for his cabin.
'Let's keep our eyes open.
I do not like this smelly herbalist.' 'Any particular reason?' 'I'm suspicious of people who spend their summers near cemeteries.
Additionally, cemeteries far from human settlements.
Don't herbs grown in pleasanter places? This Regis looks more like a grave robber.
Surgeons, alchemists and their kind like digging for corpses so they can later do various experiments on them.' 'Experiments, Zoltan.
Such practices are done on fresh corpses.
This cemetery is extremely old.' 'Yeah,' the dwarf scratch his beard thoughtfully, and watched the Kernow women prepare to spend their night under cherry bushes growing around the cabin of the medic.
'Could it be he is stealing the valuables hidden in the tombs?' 'Ask him.' Geralt shrugged.
'You accepted his invitation extending his home to us, without affections, and now, suddenly, you have become as suspicious as an old maid given a compliment.' 'Hmm,' Zoltan thought.
'You have a point.
But we're here; we should see what he has in the hut.
Oh yes, just to be sure...' 'Get in there and ask to borrow a fork.' 'Why a fork?' 'Why not?' The dwarf looked up at him, but finally decided to; he strode to the hut, knocked on the door frame and entered.
He spent a long time inside, before he again appeared at the door.
'Geralt, Percival, Dandelion, come see something interesting.
Well, go ahead, Regis has invited you.' The interior of the cabin was dark and filled with heavy, intoxication smells from bundles of herbs and spices hanging on the walls.
The only furniture was a bed, also covered in herbs, and a crooked table, covered with countless glass, earthenware and porcelain bottles.
The scant light that allowed them to see it all came from a squat, hourglass-like pot-bellied stove.
The stove was wrapped around with a web of glowing tubes, bent into arcs and spirals.
Under one of these, was a wooden bowl, which was catching clear liquid falling from the tube.
Upon seeing the stove, Percival Schuttenbach widened his eyes, opened his mouth and sigh with undisguised awe.
'Oh, oh, oh,' he shouted with an enthusiasm that was impossible to hide.
'What do I see here? A real alchemical calcinator! And on top an alembic equipped with a rectification device and a copper cooler! Beautiful work! Did you build this yourself, master surgeon?' 'Yes,' Emiel Regis modestly acknowledged.
'I am dedicated to making elixirs, so I have to distill.
To extract the fifth essences, as well as...' He paused, seeing Zoltan place his thumb below the tube to catch a drop and then licked it.
The dwarf sighed.
Even in the darkness, his ruddy face was a picture of indescribably bliss.
Dandelion could not stand it, so he tasted it too.
He moaned softly.
'Fifth essence,' he said, smacking his lips appreciatively.
'Maybe even six or seven.' 'Well, yes.' The surgeon smiled slightly.
'I told you a distillation...' 'Moonshine.' Zoltan correctly him indignantly.
'And what a residue.
Try it, Percival.' 'But I do not understand organic chemistry.' The gnome said distractedly, on his knees examining the details of the construction of the alchemical stove.
'It is doubtful I would recognize the ingredients...' 'It is a distillation of Alraune,' Regis dispelled his doubts, 'with the addition of belladonna.
The alcohol fermentation enzymes I used...' 'In other words, yeast?' 'You could call it that.' 'Are there any glasses around here?' 'Zoltan, Dandelion.' The witcher stood with his hands folded across his chest.
'Are you deaf? The moonshine is made of mandrake.
Leave the kettle alone.' 'But dear, Geralt.' The alchemist dug a small beaker from out of the dusty retorts and bottles and cleaned it thoroughly with a rag.
'There is no need to fear.
The mandrake is correctly cured, and the proportions are carefully selected and accurately weighed.
For one pound of yeast I get five ounces of Alraune and only half an ounce of belladonna...' 'It is not about that.' Zoltan looked at the witcher, he understood the point, he turned serious and carefully backed away from the stove.
'It is not that, Mister Regis, but about how much the Alraune costs.
It is too expensive a drink for us.' 'Mandragora.' Dandelion whispered admiringly, pointing to the towering pile in a corner booth resembling small bulbs of sugar beets.
'This is mandrake? True mandrake?' 'The female variety,' said the alchemist.
'I find it in abundance in the cemetery, where we met.
Which is precisely why I spend my summers here.' The witcher looked meaningfully at Zoltan.
The dwarf winked.
Regis cracked a half smile.
'Please, please, gentlemen, if you like, you are cordially invited to a tasting.
I appreciate your tact, but in the current situation I have little chance of bringing elixirs to Dillingen during war.
It would all go to waste, and therefore do not talk about prices.
Excuse me, but I only have one drinking vessel.' 'One is enough,' said Zoltan, taking the cup and carefully filling it.
'To your health, Mister Regis.
Uuuuch...' 'I beg your pardon,' Regis apologized.
'The quality of the distillate is still not fully meeting the demanded requirements... This is still a work in progress.' 'Well, it is the best thing I have drunk in half my life.' Zoltan caught his breath.
'Here, poet.' 'Aaaach... Oh, wow excellent! Try it, Geralt.' 'For the host.' The witcher bowed slightly towards Regis.
'Where are your manners, Dandelion?' 'I beg your forgiveness, gentlemen,' the alchemist said.
'I do not drink.
My health is no longer what is was, so I had to give up... many pleasures.' 'Not even a sip?' 'It is a matter of principle.' Regis said quietly.
'I never violate the principles I set for myself.' 'You have my admiration.
I can only envy such principles.' Geralt took a sip, after a moment's hesitation he drank it to the bottom.
After tasting it, it was impossible to keep tears from his eyes.
It spread a pleasant warmth to his stomach.
'I'll get Milva.' He offered, handing the empty vessel to the dwarf.
'Don't drink it all before we return.' Milva sat with the horses and played with the freckled girl with the braids that she had carried that day in the saddle.
When she learned of Regis's hospitality, she initially shrugged, but it did not take long to convince her.
When they entered the hut, they found the company inspecting the stored mandrake roots.
'This is the first time I've seen one,' said Dandelion, turning the branched root in his hands.
'They are indeed, somewhat reminiscent of a man.' 'Twisted by back pain.' Zoltan said.
'And the other, looks like a pregnant woman.
And this one, excuse me, looked like to people lying together.' 'You only have one thing on your mind.' Milva bravely swallowed the moonshine, and burst into a coughing fit.
'So... it is a strong spirit! Is it really made from mandrake? Ha, then lets drink then! It's not every day this happens to us.
Thank you, sir surgeon.' 'The pleasure is all mine.' The constantly topped up vessel was circulated among those present and provoked a good mood, relaxation and talking.
'I often used to hear, that the mandrake is a vegetable with great magical power.' Said Percival Schuttenbach.
'You can say that again,' Dandelion confirmed, emptied the cup, shook his head and continued.
'Many ballads are composed on the subject.
Sorcerers add mandrake to elixirs, which provide them with eternal youth.
Sorceresses make an ointment with Alraune called glamour.
When a sorceress used the ointment, she becomes so beautiful that the people around them eye's start to pop.
I can also tell you that mandrake is a powerful aphrodisiac, used in love magic, especially to break resistant women.
Hence the popular name of mandrake: pucelesta.
Which means, heaven to whores.' 'Stupid.' Milva commented.
'I heard,' the gnome said, raising the cup, 'that if the Alraune root is removed from the ground, it cries and complains as if alive.' 'Bah!' Zoltan said, shaking his head.
'If it only complained! The mandrake, they say, has a scream so horrible you can lose your senses from it, and to top it off it shouts spells and curses at him who snatched it from the ground.
Such a risk can pay with your life.' 'I think it is a story for the donkeys,' Milva took the cup, drank from it and shuddered.
'I don't believe that a plant could have such power.' 'It has been proven true!' The dwarf cried passionately.
'But wise herbalists have invented a way to protect themselves.
When they find Alraune they tie a rope to the root and the other end they attached to a dog...' 'Or a pig.' Said the gnome.
'Or a wild boar.' Dandelion said with exaggerated seriousness.
'You are stupid, poet.
The trick is to get the dog or the pig to pull the weed from the ground, then all the curses fall on it, while the herbalist is safely hidden in the bushes far away, and gets away alive.
What, Mister Regis? Did I say something?' 'The method is interesting,' admitted the alchemist with a smile, 'especially for its ingenuity.
The problem, in my opinion, is that it is overly complicated.
In theory, there should be enough rope without animal traction.
I don't think mandrake have the ability to recognize who is pulling the rope.
Spells and curses would always fall on the rope, which is after all cheaper and less cumbersome to use than a dog or a pig.' 'Are you mocking me?' 'Not at all.
I said I admire the ingenuity.
Though the mandrake, in my personal opinion, is not able to cast spell or curses, however, when fresh it is highly toxic.
Even the soil around the root can be poisoned.
Fresh juice if splashed in the face or on a cut hand, and even inhalation of the vapor, can be fatal.
I personally use gloves and a mask on my face, which means I don't have anything against the method of the rope and a dog.' 'Hmm...' thought the dwarf.
'And what about the terrible screaming the picked Alraune issues?' 'Mandragora has no vocal chords,' the surgeon said.
'This is typical for plants, is it not? However, a toxin which drips from a fresh plant may have a strong hallucinogenic effect.
Whispers, voices, screams and other sounds can be perceived sensations by an irritable nervous system.' 'How could I forget?' wailed Dandelion, just emptying another cup.
'Mandragora is still very poisonous! We handled it! And now we sit here drinking it...' 'Only a fresh root is toxic,' said Regis.
'These have been professionally stored and properly cured, the distillate is filtered.
There is no reason for concern.' 'Of course not,' Zoltan said.
'You can even run it through nettles, fish scales and old lace.
Give me the cup, Dandelion, because you're holding up the queue.' The cup started moving again.
Everyone sat comfortably on the trampled ground.
The witcher hissed and swore under his breath.
Carefully he straightened his leg as the knee had a stabbing pain in it again.
He saw Regis looking at him intently.
'A recent injury?' 'Not very.
But it still hurts.
Do you have an herb here, capable of pain relief?' 'It depends on the type of pain.' The surgeon smiled slightly.
'And what causes it.
In your sweat, witcher, I sense a strange smell.
Were you treated with magic? With any magic elixirs or preparations?' 'I received several medications.
I had no idea that they could still be smelled in my sweat.
You have an incredibly sensitive sense of smell, Regis.' 'Everyone has their advantages.
As well as their weaknesses.
What illness or injury were you magically treated for?' 'A broken arm and legs.' 'How long ago was that?' 'Just over a month.' 'And you already walk? Incredible.
The Dryads of Brokilon, correct?' 'How do you know this?' 'Only dryads know the medications that would rebuild a bone so quickly.
On the tops of your hands I see dark spots, places through which the purple comfrey and the symbiotic conynhaela penetrated the skin.
Only the dryads use conynhaela and purple comfrey doesn't grow outside of Brokilon.' 'Bravo.
A faultless deduction.
However, I'm interested in something else.
I broke the bones of my thighs and forearm.
Yet I feel a strong pain in the knee and the elbow.' 'It's typical,' the surgeon nodded.
'The magic of the Dryads rebuilt your damaged bone, but also caused a small revolution in the nerve endings.
A side effect most noticeable in the joints.' 'What can be done for it?' 'Sadly, nothing.
For a long time you will be able to infallibly predicted bad weather.
In winter the pain will worsen.
I can not recommend any medication for soothing the pain.
Especially narcotics.
You're a witcher; it would be unacceptable for your body.' 'So the best thing is your mandrake.' The witcher raised the glass that Milva had filled and given to him, and drank to the bottom, then coughed until tears came to his eyes.
'Damn, I feel better.' 'I'm not sure,' Regis said with a tight-lipped smile, 'you are treating the disease properly.
I remember you should cure the causes not the symptoms.' 'Not for this witcher.' A ruddy faced Dandelion snorted.
'For him and his worries, booze will do him good.' 'You should too.' Geralt froze the poet with a look.
'Especially if it numbs your tongue.' 'Do not count on it.' The surgeon smiled again.
'One of the ingredients is belladonna.
It contains various alkaloids, including scopolamine.
The strong alcohol before you, will inevitable make each of you give me a display of eloquence.' 'A display of what?' Percival asked.
'Eloquence.
Sorry.
Let us use simpler words.' Geralt's lips turned up in an imitation of a smile.
'Right,' he said.
'It is easy to fall into mannerisms and start using those words every day.
The people around them then consider them a pompous fool.' 'Or by an alchemist.' Said Zoltan, pouring another cup.
'Or by a witcher,' snorted Dandelion, 'who has been reading, in order to impress a certain sorceress.
The sorceresses, gentlemen, do not go crazy for convoluted far-fetched tales.
Am I right, Geralt? Come on, tell us...' 'Skip a few rounds, Dandelion,' interrupted the witcher coldly.
'Some of the alkaloids have started to act too quickly on you.
You talk too much.' 'I might end up with those secrets of yours, Geralt.' Zoltan frowned 'Dandelion has told us nothing new.
You can't avoid being a walking legend.
The stories of your adventures are played in puppet theaters.
Among them is the story of you and a sorceress named Guinevere.' 'Yennefer.' Regis corrected him softly.
'I saw one of those shows.
The story of you hunting a djinn, if my memory serves me.' 'I was in that one.' Boasted Dandelion.
'We had fun.
I can tell you...' 'Tell it all.' Geralt got up.
'Don't forget to drink and exaggerate.
I'm going for a walk.' 'Whoa,' said the dwarf.
'No need to get angry...' 'You don't understand, Zoltan, I'm going to relieve myself.
It happens, even to a walking legend.' *** The night was cold as hell.
The horses snorted and steam streamed from their nostrils.
The surgeons hut in the moonlight looked fabulous.
Exactly like the witch's hut in the forest.
Geralt buttoned his pants.
Milva, who had left the house shortly after, cleared her throat uncertainly.
Her shadow cast a shadow next to the one cast by Geralt.
'Why don't you go back inside?' She asked.
'Are you really offended?' 'No.' he denied.
'So why do you stand here alone in the moonlight?' 'I'm counting.' 'Huh?' 'Since we left Brokilon, twelve days have passed, during which we have travelled about sixty miles.
Ciri, so the rumors say, is in Nilfgaard, the capital of the empire, a place that separates me by two thousand five hundred miles.
A simple calculation shows that at this rate I'll get there in a year and four months.
What do you say to that?' 'Nothing.' Milva shrugged her shoulders and cleared her throat again.
'I can not count as well as you.
I can't read nor write at all.
I'm stupid, a simple wench from a village.
I'm not good company for you.
Not even for a conversation.' 'Do not say that.' 'But it is true!' she said sharply.
'Why tell me the days and miles? Do you want my advice? Do you want me to encourage you? To dispel your fears and ward off the sorrow that is worse than a broken bone? I can't! You need another.
Talk to Dandelion.
He is wise, learned.
Beloved!' 'Dandelion is a braggart.' 'Sure.
But sometimes he tends to tell the truth.
Let's go back in.
I want to drink more.' 'Milva?' 'What?' 'You never told me why you decided to come with me.' 'You never asked.' 'I'm asking now.' 'It is too late.
Now I don't even know.' *** 'Well finally, you're back.' Zoltan greeted them cheerfully.
'Now we are all here, imagine this, Regis has decided to journey with us.' 'Really?' Geralt looked at the alchemist.
'Why the sudden decision?' 'Zoltan,' Regis lowered his eyes, 'made me realize that the war that sweeps around me is much more serious than the stories I have heard from the refugees.
Returning to Dillingen is off the table and hiding in the wilderness doesn't seem wise.
Neither does wandering around alone.' 'And we, though most would not know it to look at us, are safe to travel with.
Did the one look you took suffice?' 'Two,' corrected the surgeon.
'One for the women in your care.
The second for their children.' Zoltan belched loudly.
The bottom of the cup scratching the tube.
'Appearances can be deceiving,' he joked.
'Maybe we are going to sell those women as slaves? Percival, do something about this machine.
We want to drink, but it drips like a running nose.' 'The distillate is cool enough.
The spirit will come out warm.' 'Never mind that, the night is cold.' The liquor stimulated conversation.
Dandelion, Zoltan and Percival were flushed, their voices had changed even more – in the case of the poet and the gnome it came out a lisp.
They grew hungry and chewed on cold horse meat and horseradish, which was in the hut in decent supply.
The alchemist collected a mass of roots as strong as the liquor and they were reduced t tears.
But it added fire to the discussion.
Regis showed surprise when it turned out that the final purpose of the journey was not an area in the mountains of Mahakam, which had long been the home of the dwarves.
Zoltan, who had become even more talkative than Dandelion, said he would not return under any circumstance to Mahakam, venting his displeasure of the order prevailing there, particularly in regards to the politics and the governor, Brouver Hogg who had absolute power over the dwarven clans.
'Old fart!' He yelled and spat into the coals of the stove.
'When you look at him it is hard to tell if he is alive or stuffed.
He almost never moves.
It is impossible to understand what he is talking about, because his beard and moustache are glued to a stern withered chin.
But he rules everyone, so everyone dances to his music...' 'One can not say that the policies of Lord Hogg are wrong,' said Regis.
'It is thanks to his strong views that, the dwarves have broken away and do not fight in the Scoia'tael commandos.
And the pogrom have stopped, no punitive expedition has started on Mahakam.
The normalization of relations with people has brought results.' 'Bullshit,' Zoltan drank from the cup.
'The old bastard did not seek any congeniality in the case of the Squirrels, but it was that too many youngsters threw in their jobs in the mines and forges to join with the elven commandos to enjoy freedom and adventure.
Once this phenomenon had grown in scale, Brouver Hogg tied it up very shortly.
He shitted on people for helping the Squirrels and ignored the humans retaliatory measures, including those accursed pogroms.
He celebrated because he deemed any dwarves that didn't settled in towns or cities to be renegades.
As for the threat of an expedition to Mahakam, do not be ridiculous, there is no danger, and never will be.
Which one of the kings would dare undertake anything against the Mahakam? I'll tell you something else, even if the Nilfgaardians occupied the entire valley below Mahakam, they wouldn't dare move.
Do you know why? Let me tell you: Mahakam is steel.
And not just any kind.
There's coal, there is the magnetite ore, and inexhaustible supplies.
Everywhere and all for free.' 'And the technology is in Mahakam,' Percival interjected.
'Iron, steel and metallurgy! Blast furnaces, not some shitty chimney.
Water and steam hammers...' 'Here, Percival, wet your whistle.' Zoltan passed the gnome a full cup.
'You'll bore us all with your techniques.
But not everyone knows that Mahakam exports steel.
To the Northern Kingdoms, but also to Nilfgaard.
And if someone raised a hand, we would start destroying workshops and flooding mines.
And then you humans will go to war with nothing but sticks of wood, flint and donkey jaws.' 'As annoyed as you are with Brouver Hogg and those in power in Mahakam,' noted the witcher, 'you started to say "we."' 'Of course,' confirmed the dwarf with passion.
'There is such a thing as solidarity, no? I admit that I'm proud that we are smarter than those cocky elves.
There is no denying it, huh? The elves have for a couple of hundred years have pretended that you, humans did not exist.
They stared into the heavens, smelled the flowers and turned their eyes away from you humans.
And when it turned out that this was useless, they suddenly woke up and laid their hands on weapons.
They decided to kill and be killed.
And we, dwarves? We adapted.
You believe you have conquered us, you must be dreaming.
We have conquered you.
Economically.' 'Truth be told,' Regis said, 'it was easier for you to adapt than the elves.
Elves integrate their country and territory, you integrate your clan.
Where your clan lives, that is your homeland.
Even if by chance some extremely short-sighted ruler attacked Mahakam, you'd floods your mines and destroy your workshops without regret and move elsewhere.
Maybe to another distant mountain.
Even into a human city.' 'Right! In your cities we can live very well.' 'Even in the ghettos?' Dandelion gasped after taking another mouthful of moonshine.
'And what is wrong with the ghettos? I like to live among my own kind.
Why bother to integrate?' 'So we may enter the guilds.' Percival wiped his nose with his sleeve.
'In the end they'll allow it,' the dwarf spoke with conviction, 'and if not, then we'll start our own guilds, and give them some healthy competition.' 'But in Mahakam it is safer than in the towns and cities.' Regis said.
'Cities can be burned and destroyed during turbulent times.
It would be sensible to wait out the war in the mountains.' 'Those who feel like it can go.' Zoltan took another cup.
'I prefer freedom, and I can not find that in Mahakam.
You can not imagine what it is like under the old government.
They spoke recently about the regulation of affairs, what they call social relations.
For example, if you can wear suspenders or not.
Eat fish immediately or wait until the jelly is set.
If you play the ocarina in accordance with our centuries-old traditions, or if played with the harmful influences and decadence of the rotten human culture.
After many years of work, you can apply for a marriage permit.
How far from the mine are you allowed to whistle.
And other similar matters of great interest.
No boys, I'm not going back to Mount Carbon.
I have no desire to spend the rest of my years down the mine.
Forty years on the bottom, breathing methane was enough.
But we have other plans, right, Percival? We already have a secured future...' 'Future, future...' The gnome emptied the cup, blew his nose and looked at the dwarf with his bleary eyes.
'Do not say a peep, Zoltan.
Because we can still be caught, and then our future will be the noose... Or Drakenborg.' 'Shut your mouth.' Snarled the dwarf, looking at him menacingly.
'You've said too much!' 'Scopolamine.' Regis muttered under his breath.
*** The gnome talked nonsense.
Milva frowned.
Zoltan, forgetting that he already told everyone about the old fart, Hogg the Mahakam thane, started again.
Geralt, forgetting he had already been told or this, listened.
Regis also listened and even added comments, completely calm about being the only sober one among those present.
Dandelion strummed his lute and sang.
It is not unusual beautiful women are hard to see, The more proud the tree, the high you have to climb it.
'Idiot.' Milva commented.
Dandelion continued unfazed.
A girl can be a tree but a fool who is not, should get an ax and end the problem.
'The grail...' Percival Schuttenbach muttered.
'The grail... Made from a single piece of milky opal... Oh, so great... I found it on top of Montsalvat.
The edge was rimmed with jasper and the base was made of gold.
A veritable wonder...' 'Do not give him more spirits.' Zoltan said.
'What a minute,' Dandelion said with interest, also mumbling.
'What happened to this legendary grail?' 'I traded it for a mule.
I needed a mule to carry the load... Corundum and crystalline carbon.
I had this... Eeep ...
A bunch of... Eeep... Cargo, it was heavy, without a mule I couldn't move it... What did I want with a grail?' 'Corundum? Carbon?' 'Well, to you they would be rubies and diamonds.
Very... eeep... useful.' 'For what?' 'For drills and files.
For bearings.
I had a whole pile...' 'Do you hear that, Geralt?' Zoltan waved his arms in the air, almost knocking himself over on his back.
'He dreams of a heap of diamonds.
Beware, Percival, who you meet while asleep! He may take your diamonds.' 'Dreams, dreams,' Dandelion stammered again.
'And you, Geralt? Have you dreamed of Ciri again? Because you must know, Regis, that Geralt has prophetic dream! Ciri is a Child Surprise, Geralt is tied to her by ties of destiny, and therefore he sees her in his dreams.
Know that we are also headed to Nilfgaard to retrieve our Ciri, who has been kidnapped by the Emperor Emhyr.
Whatever it takes to get her, the son of a bitch, we'll get her before he realizes! I would say more to you, boys, but it is a secret.
A terrible, deep, dark secret... No one can know about this, understand? Nobody!' 'I have not heard anything,' Zoltan said, looking boldly at the witcher.
'It seems I have an earwig in my ear.' 'These earwigs are a real pest,' said Regis, pretending to poke in his ear.
'We travel to Nilfgaard...' Dandelion rested on the dwarf.
It should have helped him maintain balance, but instead proved to be highly unstable.
'But it as I said, a secret.
A secret goal!' 'Indeed, artfully concealed,' nodded the surgeon, glancing at the pale with anger, Geralt.
'Analyzing the direction of your journey, even the most suspicious person could never guess the purpose of your trip.' *** 'Milva, what is it?' 'Do not talk to me, you drunken fool.' 'Hey, she's crying! Hey, look...' 'Go to hell, I say!' The archer wiped her tears.
'Because I'll hit you between the eyes, little shit... Pass the cup, Zoltan...' 'I don't know where it is...' muttered the dwarf.
'Ah, here it is.
Thanks, surgeon... And where the hell is Schuttenbach?' 'He went out.
Some time ago.
Dandelion, I recall you promised to tell me a story about a child surprise.' 'Right away.
Now, now, Regis.
Just a little drink... And I'll tell you everything... About Ciri and the witcher... In detail...' 'For fuck's sake bastards!' 'Keep you voice down, dwarf! You are going to wake the children sleeping outside the hut!' 'Don't be angry, archer.
Here, have a drink.' 'Eeeech.' Dandelion surveyed the hut with blurred vision.
'I just saw the Countess de Lettenhove...' 'Who?' 'Whatever.
Damn, this moonshine really loosens the tongue... Geralt, can I pour you another? Geralt!' 'Leave him alone.' Milva said.
'Let him dream.' *** Standing on the edge of the village the barn rumbled with music, the music caught up to them before they had even rode up, filled with excitement.
Unconsciously they began to sway in their saddles walking the horses at a trot, first in rhythm to the beating of the drum, then in accordance with the melody and flutes.
The night was cold, the moon shone bright.
In the light, the barn looked like an enchanted castle from the stories.
In the light falling from the door was the flickering shadows of men and women dancing.
When they entered, the music immediately stopped, dying in mid note.
The villagers sweaty and tired from dancing away, huddled along the walls and posts.
Ciri, walking beside Mistle, saw the startled eyes of the girls and women, hard, unfriendly looks from the younger boys and men.
She heard whispering and muttering, in a short time it became as loud as the bleating of bagpipes, and the hum of a violin.
They whispered: 'Rats, Rats... Bandits...' 'Do not worry,' Giselher said aloud, and threw a money pouch to the silent musicians.
'We came to have fun.
A feast is for everyone, right?' 'Where is the beer?' Kayleigh shook his pouch.
'Where is your hospitality?' 'And why is everyone so silent?' Spark looked around.
'We came from the mountains for fun.
Not a funeral.' Finally one of the villagers ventured forth and went to Giselher with an earthen pitcher, with foam dripping over the edge.
Giselher bowed and took a deep drink, and politely thanked them.
Several of those present raised their pints in toast.
But the other remained silent.
'Hey, neighbors,' said Spark, 'I want to join the dance, but as you can see, you'll first need to start moving!' Along one wall of the barn was a long table, full of heavy earthenware.
The elf clapped her hands and jumped nimbly onto the oak table.
The villagers picked up the dishes as quickly as possible, those that were not managed to be taken away, were viscously kicked by Spark.
'Well, gentlemen,' Spark said with her fists on her hips, shaking her hair.
'Show me what you know.
Music!' She did a quick step with her heels.
The drum and dulcimer repeated it.
The flutes and fiddles picked up the melody, making it more complicated, challenging Spark to change pace and rhythm.
The elf, light and colorful as a butterfly, easily adjusted.
The villagers began to clap.
'Falka!' Spark shouted, squinting her eyes.
'You're quick with the sword! What about dancing? Can you follow the steps?' Ciri, released herself from Mistle's arms, unwound the scarf from her neck and took off her beret and jacket.
She jumped onto the table next to the elf.
The villagers cheered, the drums boomed and the bagpipes whined.
'Play, Musicians!' Spark cried.
'Keep your ear! And with spirit!' Leaning to one side and throwing her head far back the elf tapped her feet, danced, beating her heels in a rhythmic and rapid staccato.
Ciri, captivated by the rhythm, repeated the steps.
The elf laughed, jumped and changed the rhythm.
Ciri with a violent jerk of her head, shook her hair off her forehead, she repeated the steps perfectly.
Dancing both at the same time, they were mirror images of each other.
The villagers shouted and applauded.
The melody raised above the deep bass growl of the drums and the bleating of the bagpipes.
Both danced, as straight as a cane, touching elbows, with their hands supported on hips.
The plates and table shook with the rhythm of their heels, in the light of tallow candle and oil lights, the dust stirred.
'Faster!' Spark urged the musicians.
'With more vigor!' It was not dancing, it was an obsession.
'Dance, Falka! Forget about everything!' Heel, toe, heel, toe, step forward, step back, jump, strafe, move arms, toss her head, heel toe, heel toe.
The table was shaking, the light quivered, the audience wavered, everything was spinning, the whole barn danced, danced... villagers cried, Giselher screamed, Asse screaming, Mistle laughing and clapping, all clapping and stomping, the barn shaking, the earth shaking, the world shaking on its foundations.
World? What world? The world is no more, nothing, just the dance, dance... Heel, toe, heel... Spark's elbow... Fever, fever... Just a fiddle playing, flutes, bagpipes, drums raising and lowering the tempo, there is no need, there is just the rhythm, Spark and Ciri, their heels, the table swaying, rumbling and sways the whole barn... The rhythm, the rhythm is them, the music is them, they are the music.
Spark dances, her dark hair swaying around her forehead and shoulders.
The strings of the fiddles song bears a fever, a hotness, which reaches to the highest registers.
The blood pounds in her temples.
Forget.
Forget.
'I am Falka.
I was always Falka! Dance, Spark! Clap, Mistle!' The fiddle and the flute played a sharp closing note.
Spark and Ciri end their dance by stomping their heels, their elbows continuing to touch.
Breathless, shaky, sweaty, they dash to each other, to embrace, each covered in sweat, heat and happiness.
The barn exploded with a loud cry and the applause of dozens of hands.
'Falka, you devil,' Spark gasped for breath.
'When we get tired of robbery, we can head into the world to make money as dancers...' Ciri was also gasping for breath.
She was incapable of speech and could only laugh breathlessly.
Tears ran down her face.
The crowd suddenly cried in agitation.
Kayleigh violently pushed a villager, the villager pushed Kayleigh back, both struggled against each other, flailing with fists.
Reef quickly approached them and in the light of the torches a dagger flashed.
'No, Stop!' Spark screamed shrilling 'Don't fight! This is a night of dance!' The elf took Ciri's hand and they both jumped down from the table onto the trampled ground.
'Musicians, play! Who wants to show us how to dance, who is brave?' The monotone humming of the bagpipes became a prolonged wail, followed by the sharp edge of the fiddle.
The villagers laughed, overcoming their shyness.
One of them, a tall blonde, proceed to Spark.
The second, younger and slimmer, timidly bowed before Ciri.
She proudly tossed her head, but soon smiled delightedly.
The boy grabbed Ciri around the waist.
She placed her hands on his shoulders.
His touched pierced like a fiery blade, filled with hidden desire.
'With vigor, musicians!' The barn shook with shouts, vibrating to the rhythm and the melody.
Ciri danced.
Vampir: or vampire, one who is undead, revived by Chaos.
After their first life is lost, their second life is lived in the dark of night.
They leave their tombs, in the light of the moon and attack sleeping people, most likely young women and without waking them from their slumber, drink their sweet blood.
Physiologus The villagers had eaten garlic in great abundance, and for greater certainty, placed garlands of garlic around their necks.
Some, especially the women, placed the garlic everywhere.
The whole village smelled horribly of garlic, the villagers then thought they were safe and that there was nothing the vampire could do to them.
Great was their surprise when the vampire arrived at midnight, he was not frightened and began to laugh and started grinding his teeth in delight.
"It is good," he cried "that ye are seasoned, because I eat meat well-seasoned and it is more to my tastes.
Also throw on some salt and pepper and do not forget the mustard." Silvester Bugiardo Liber Tenebrarum or The Book of Scary but true tales that have never been explained by science.
The moon shines, the dead flies, the dress flutters, flutters... Miss, are you not afraid? Folk song 

