Chapter Six 

 

 

She was awakened by the heat. The heat burned her skin like an executioners iron. 

 She could not move her head, something held her back. She tugged and howled in pain, feeling the 
tears and splits from the skin on her temple. She opened her eyes. The stone on which she rested her 
head was brown from the dry clotted blood. She touched her temple; her fingers felt a hard, cracked 
crust. Her scab had been attached to the stone, and now flowed with blood from where she had pulled 
her head away. Ciri coughed and spat out sand and long sticky saliva. She raised herself up on her 
elbows; she looked around, then lay back down. 

 On all sides she was surrounded by a rocky plain, a red-grey, cut by ravines and faults, with 
mounds of stones piled here and there and huge boulders in bizarre shapes. On the plain, high above, 
the hot sun hung huge, golden yellow in the sky which distorted the view completely with it blinding 
glare and vibrating air. 

 'Where am I?' 

 She carefully touched the swollen wound on her temple. It hurt. I hurt a lot. I must have hit a pretty 
large rock, she thought. I must have taken a good tumble through the air. Suddenly she noticed her 
clothes torn and ripped, and found new sources of pain in her kidneys, back, arms and thighs. During 
the fall, sand and pebbles had gotten everywhere: in her hair, ears, mouth, also in her eyes, which 
were stinging and weeping. Her fingers and elbows burned where they had been scrapped to the bone. 
Slowly and gently she straightened her legs and groaned again, because her left knee answered with a 
sharp pain. She massaged the knee through her leather pants, she saw no swelling. When trying to 
breathe she felt an ominous stinging in her side, and when trying to bend her torso she almost 
screamed, a strong spasm emanated from her lower back. Just bruised, she thought. I don't think I 
have broken anything. If I had a broken bone it would hurt more. I'm only a little battered. I can stand. 
I can get up. 

 Gradually, with slow movements, she assumed a kneeling position clumsily trying to protect her 
injured knee. She then got on all fours, moaning, panting and groaning. Finally after what seemed like 
an eternity, she stood up. Only to collapse immediately back to the stones, due to a way of dizziness. 
Feeling a violent wave of nausea, she lay on her side. The rocks burned like fiery red coals. 

 'I can't get up...' she sobbed. 'I can't... I'll burn under this sun...' 

 Her head was throbbing a dull, terrible, unstoppable throb. Every movement made the pain grow 
worse, so Ciri stopped moving. She covered her head with her arms, but the heat soon became 
unbearable. She realized she would have to escape it. Overcoming the pain in her body, squinting 
from the pain in her temples, she crawled on all fours towards a huge rock shaped by the wind to 
resemble a large mushroom, whose shapeless hat gave a bit of shade at its base. She curled herself into 
a ball, coughing and sniffing. 

 She lay there a long time, until the sun wandered across the sky and caught up to her again pouring 
its fire down from above. She shifted to the other side of the boulder, only to realize that it did make a 
difference. The sun was at its zenith, the mushroom stone gave almost no shade. She pressed her 
hands to her temples which were bursting with pain. 


 She was awakened by a shuddering across her whole body. The fireball-like sun had lost its 
blinding glare. It was now hanging low over the jagged toothed rocks, it was orange. The heat had 
receded somewhat. 

 Ciri sat down with effort and looked around. Her headache had eased and was no longer blinding. 
She massaged her head and noticed that the heat had dried the wound on her temple, turning it into a 
hard slippery crust. Still, her whole body hurt, she felt that she did not have one healthy place on it. 
She cleared her throat, sand gritted between her teeth. She tried to spit the sand out, to no avail. She 
leaned back against the mushroom shaped boulder, still warm from the sun. It had finally stopped 
scorching, she thought. Now when the sun goes down, it will no longer be unbearable, and soon... 

 Soon night will fall. 

 She gave a shudder. Where the hell am I? How do I get out of here? And which way? Where do I 
go? Would it be better to stay here and hope they find me? After all they'll search for me. Geralt. 
Yennefer. They won't abandon me... 

 Again and again she tried to spit but could not. Then she understood. 

 Thirst. 

 She remembered. Even during her flight, thirst had tormented her. She remembered that on the 
saddle of the horse she mounted when fleeing the Tower of Gulls was a wooden canteen. At the time 
she had no time to untie and drink from it. And now the canteen was gone. There was nothing. 
Nothing but scorched stones, the tightness that the wound to her head caused her skin, the pain in her 
body and the dryness of her throat, which was not possible to relieve by even swallowing salvia. 

 I cannot stay here. I must find water. If I don't find water I'm going to die. 

 She tried to get up, resting her hands on the mushroom shaped stone. She rose slowly. She took a 
step. And with a yelp collapsed and feel on her hands and knees again, her body spasmed in a dry 
retch. A dizziness gripped her so strong that she was forced to lie on the ground again. 

 I am powerless. And alone. Again. Everyone has betrayed me, abandoned me, left me alone. Just 
like before... 

 Ciri felt her throat constrict in an invisible vice, her jaw ache and her cracked lips began to tremble. 
She recalled the words of Yennefer. "There is nothing more disgusting that the sight of a sorceress 
crying." But no one can see me here... No one... 

 Curled up under the mushroom shaped stone, Ciri sobbed, and started a dry, awful cry. Without 
tears. 

 When she tried to open her swollen eyelids, they were reluctant to open, she realized that the heat 
had receded more, and the sky was no longer orange but a cobalt blue dotted with thin strips of white 
clouds. The disc of the red sun was lower than before, but it still poured heat over the desert in waves. 
Or maybe the stones were radiating heat? 

 She sat down, noting that the pain in her skull and her beaten body had ceased to bother her. At that 
moment, nothing compared with the growing pit in her stomach and the terrible itching that forced her 
to cough her throat raw. 

 I mustn't surrender, she thought. I cannot give up. As in Kaer Morhen, I need to get up, I have to 
defeat, overcome, and suppress this pain and weakness. I have to get up now and go. Now at least I 
know in which direction to go. Where the sun is now in the west is where I need to go. I have to find 
water and something to eat. I have to. Otherwise I'll perish. This is a desert. I flew to a desert. That 
thing I entered in the Tower of Gulls, it was a magic portal, a device with which you can move over 
long distances... 

 The portal in Tor Lara was a strange portal. When she rushed to the last floor, there was nothing, 
not even windows, just bare walls covered with fungus. And on one wall burned an irregular oval 
filled with an opalescent glow. She had hesitated, but the portal had attracted her, summoned her, even 
begged her. And there was no other way out, only the brilliant oval. She had closed her eyes and 
stepped into it. 

 Then there was a blinding brightness and a raging maelstrom, an explosion took her breath away 
crushing her ribs. She remembered the flight in the silence, the cold and emptiness, then another flash 
and the howling of the air. Above her blue, below a blurry greyness... 


 She dropped in flight, just as the sea eagle drops the fish into the air when it is too heavy for it. 
When she hit the stones, she'd lost consciousness. She was not sure for how long. 

 I had read in the temple about portals, she recalled, shaking the sand from her hair. In the books it 
mentioned teleporters were warped and chaotic, leading to nowhere to hurling people into unknown 
places. Surely the portal in the Tower of Gulls was one of these. I've been thrown to the end of the 
world No one knows where I am. No one is going to look for me. If I stay here I die. 

 She stood up. Mobilizing all her strength and relying on the rock, she took a step. Then a second. 
Then a third. 

 Those first steps made her realize that her right boot buckles were broken and the drooping buckle 
prevented her from walking. She sat down, this time voluntarily, without falling and did a review of 
her clothing and equipment. 

 The first thing she discovered was her sword. She had forgotten about it as the scabbard had slipped 
back. On her belt, next to the sword, as always, was a small purse. A gift from Yennefer. Containing 
"what a lady should always have with her." Ciri untied the knot holding it closed. Unfortunately the 
standard equipment of a lady did not reflect the situation in which she found herself now. The purse 
contained a tortoiseshell comb, a nail-file, and a package wrapped in linen that contained a jade pot of 
hand lotion. Ciri, immediately began to pour the cream onto her face and parched lips, and 
immediately licked her hungry lips of the ointment. Without thinking she licked clean the entire jar, 
enjoying the soothing touch of the fat and moisture. The chamomile, amber and camphor that were 
used to flavour the cream tasted disgusting, but acted as a stimulant. 

 She tied the broken buckle of her boot with a strip torn from her sleeve, got up and took a few steps 
to try it out. She tore off some more and made a bandage that protected her temple and battered 
sunburned forehead. 

 She got up, straightened her belt and shifted her sword around on her hips, instinctively she drew it 
from the scabbard, and ran her thumb down the blade. It was sharp. She already knew it. 

 I have a weapon, she thought. I'm a witcher. No, I will not die here. As for hunger, I've endured 
fasting for two days in the temple of Melitele. And water... I have to find water. I'll walk until I find 
some. This ploughing desert has to stop somewhere, if it is a big desert I would have noticed it in the 
maps I studied with Jarre. Jarre.. I wonder what he is doing now... 

 I'm decided. I'm going west, I'll see where the sun sets, it's the only safe location. At the end of the 
day, I never err, I always know which way to go. If need be, I'll walk all night. I'm a witcher. As soon 
as my strength returns, I will run the Trail. Then I will soon get to the edge of the desert. I will endure. 
I must endure... Ha, I'm sure Geralt has been in more than one desert like this, who knows maybe he 
has been in others that are even worse... 

 I'm going. 

 The scenery did not change during the first hour of her march. All around there was nothing but 
grey-red rocks, sharp, which made her legs slip, forcing her to be cautious. A few shrubs, dry and 
thorny with their twisted stems spread towards her from cracks in the ground. When she first 
encountered the shrubs, Ciri stopped thinking that it would be possible to find some leaves or a young 
branch that she could suck or chew. But the bush had nothing but thorns that pricked her fingers. It did 
not serve to even make a cane. The second and third bush were exactly alike, she ignored them, 
passing without stopping. 

 Night fell quickly. The sun set over the broken teeth of the horizon, the sky glowed red and purple. 
With the sunset came the cold. At first she welcomed it with joy, as it relieved her burned skin. 
However, it soon became even colder, and Ciri's teeth began to chatter. She quickened her pace, 
hoping that it would warm her up, but the effort again awoke the pain in her knee. She started to limp. 
The downside of the sun sinking completely below the horizon was the immediate darkness that 
followed. There was a new moon and the stars that dotted the sky did not help. Soon, Ciri could no 
longer see the road ahead. A few time she stumbled, painfully scraping the skin on her wrists. Twice 
her foot slipped into a crack in the rock and she only escaped a broken ankle thanks to her training as 
a witcher which helped against falls. The march in the dark was impossible. 

 She sat down on a flat block of basalt, feeling a paralysing despair wash over her. She had no idea 
whether the direction she walked was the same as where the sun disappeared behind the horizon. She 


had completely lost sight of the glow, which had guided her through the first hours after sunset. All 
around her was only velvety, impenetrable blackness. And a piercing cold. Cold, which paralysed, 
biting the joints, which forced her to shrink and put her head between her arms that ached because of 
the awkward position. Ciri began to miss the sun, but knew that its return would come crashing onto 
the rocks making them glow, which she would not be able to endure. In which she would not be able 
to continue the march. Again her throat felt gripped with the desire to weep, and embrace the wave of 
despair and hopelessness. But this time despair and hopelessness turned into rage. 

 'I will not cry!' She shouted at the darkness. 'I am a witcher I am a...' 

 Sorceress. 

 Ciri raised her arm, pressed her hand against her temple. The Force is everywhere. In the water, in 
the air, on the land... 

 She rose quickly, reached out slowly, taking a few uncertain steps, searching feverishly for the 
source. She was lucky. Almost immediately she felt a familiar buzzing in her ears, felt the energy 
pulsing in a vein of water hidden in the depths of the earth. She drew upon the Force carefully as she 
knew she was weak and in this state a sudden de-oxygenation of the brain could send her spiralling 
into unconsciousness, making the whole attempt futile. The energy slowly started to fill her, it gave 
her a familiar sense of euphoria. Her lungs started to work stronger and faster. Ciri controlled her 
accelerated breathing, too much oxygenation could also have fatal consequences. 

 She succeeded. 

 First tiredness, she thought, then this crippling pain in my arms and thighs. Then the cold. I have to 
raise my body temperature... 

 Slowly she recalled the gestures and spells. Some of them she performed and spoke to quickly – 
suddenly she was gripped by cramps and convulsions, violent spasms and light headedness that bent 
her knees. She dropped to the basalt and calmed her shaking hands, controlled her quick, arrhythmic 
breathing. 

 She repeated the formula, forcing herself to calmness and precision, to focus and unify her entire 
will. And this time the results were immediate. An enveloping warmth caressed her thighs and neck. 
She stood up, feeling the fatigue disappear, and her sore muscles relax. 

 'I am a sorceress!' she shouted triumphantly, raising her hand high. 'Come, Light immortal! I 
summon you! Aen'drean va, eveigh Aine!' 

 A small globe of light appeared and hovered just above her hand. It was the size of a butterfly and 
the light it produced threw a dynamic patchwork of shadows onto the rocks. She slowly moved her 
hand, steadying the globe, placing it so that it hung in the air in front of her. It was not a good idea. 
The light blinded her. She tried to put the globe behind her back, but this also produced a bad result, 
her shadow covered the road, deteriorating visibility. Ciri slowly moved the globe of light to one side 
and hung it a little above her right arm. Although the globe would never match that of a truly magical 
Aine, the girl was extremely proud of her achievement. 

 'Ha!' She said, elated. 'It's a shame that Yennefer could not see this!' 

 She continued walking, cheerfully and energetically, walking quickly and confidently, selecting the 
path in the flickering and uncertain light and shadows cast by the globe. As she walked, she tried to 
remember the other spells, but none seemed right or usefully in this situation, moreover, some were 
very exhausting and she was a little afraid of them and would not use them unless necessary. 
Unfortunately she didn't know any that would be able to create food or water. She knew they existed 
but did not know them. 

 In the light of the magical sphere, the desert, which seemed dead until then, came to life. Trying to 
escape from under her feet where a bright array of beetles and hairy spiders. A small yellow and red 
scorpion, dragging behind it its segmented tail ran across her path, swiftly disappearing through a 
crack between the rocks. A green long-tailed lizard disappeared into the darkness, making the sand 
crackle. There followed in its wake a large rodent like creature, which leaped nimbly and very high on 
its hind legs. She could make out several times in the dark bright eyes and once she heard a hissing 
sound coming from a rocky outcrop that froze the blood in her veins. At first she intended to catch 
something that she could eat, once she heard the hissing the desire to wander among the rocks was 
gone. She began to look more carefully where she was putting her feet and images of books she had 


read at Kaer Morhen swam before her eyes. A giant scorpion. The scarletia. The vicht. The lamia. 
Creatures that lived in deserts. She walked, looking fearfully around, her ears remained alert while her 
sweaty hand clutched the hilt of her sword. 

 A few hours later, the globe of light was growing weaker. The circle of light emanating from the 
globe grew smaller, darkened and blurred. Ciri concentrated with difficulty and again uttered the spell. 
The globe burned bright again for a few moments, but then darkened and shrink again. The effort 
staggered her, black and red spots danced before her eyes. She sat down heavily, grinding gravel and 
loose stones. 

 The globe of light went out completely. Ciri no longer attempted any spells, the exhaustion, 
emptiness and lack of energy she felt within herself predicted the failure of the attempt. 

 Before her, on the horizon, a vague glow was rising. I've taken a wrong turn, she thought with 
horror. I've been walking in circles... At first I was going west, now the sun will rise directly in from 
of me... That means... 

 She felt an overwhelming fatigue and drowsiness, that could not be dispelled by the fright or the 
cold that made her shiver. I will not sleep, she decided. I must not... I must... 

 She was awakened by a penetrating cold, the growing brightness, a stomach pain that twisted her 
bowls and the dry itching in her throat. She tried to get up but could not. Her sore and cramped limbs 
refused to obey. Groping her hands around, she felt a wetness on her fingers. 

 'Water...' she croaked. 'Water!' 

 Trembling all over, she rose on all fours and put her lips to the basalt plate and feverishly poked out 
her tongue to collect the droplets of water that were running down the smooth surface of the rock, 
collection in the clefts. One such cleft held about an inch of water. She drank it down with the sand 
and gravel, not daring to spit. She looked around. 

 Carefully, so not to miss a drop, she licked up droplets from a thorny shrub that had somehow 
managed to grow among the rocks. Her sword lay on the ground. She could not remember drawing it 
from its sheath. The blade was thick with a layer of dew. Carefully and thoroughly she licked the cool 
metal. 

 Mastering the pain that numbed her body, she crawled forward on all fours, in pursuit of moisture 
on other stones. But the gold disc of the sun, rising above the rocky horizon, flooded the desert with 
blinding golden light and the rocks dried up within minutes. Ciri welcomed the rising heat, however 
she was aware of the fact that soon she would be mercilessly roast and she'd miss the cold night. 

 She turned her back to the bright sphere. It shone in the east. And she had to go west. She had to. 

 The heat grew and intensified rapidly and soon it became unbearable. As noon approached it 
became clear that like it or not, she'd have to change direction and seek some shade. She finally found 
a refuge, a large rock resembling a mushroom. She crawled beneath it. 

 And then see saw an object lying among the rocks. I was a small jade pot of hand cream, licked 
clean. 

 She found within herself enough strength to cry. 

 

*** 

 

 Hunger and thirst overcame her weariness and resignation. She undertook a staggering march. The 
sun was burning. 

 Far away on the horizon, through a shimmering curtain of heat, she was something that could only 
be a mountain range. A very distant mountain range. 

 As night fell, with enormous difficulty she drew upon the Force, but only managed to create a 
magical globe of light after several attempts and it exhausted her so she could not go on. She had lost 
all energy, her warming and relaxing spells had failed her, despite many attempts. The conjured light 
gave her courage and lifted her spirits, but the cold extinguished it. The piercing cold gripped her and 
made her shudder until dawn. She trembled, waiting patiently for the sunrise. She pulled her sword 
from it sheath, placing it carefully on a stone so the metal could collect the morning dew. She was 
terribly tired but hunger and thirst keep sleep at bay. She lasted until dawn. It was still dark when she 


began to hungrily lick the dew from the sword's blade. When day broke, she immediately threw 
herself on all fours to look for moisture in the hollows and crevices. 

 She heard a hiss. 

 A large colourful lizard was sitting on a nearby block of rock, revealing a toothless mouth, its 
impressive crest swelled and it hit the rock with its tail. In front of the lizard was a tiny fissure filled 
with water. 

 At first, Ciri backed away scared but immediately became overwhelmed by a wild and desperate 
rage. Groping around with her trembling hands, she grabbed a sharp piece of rock. 

 'That's my water!' She cried. "Mine!' 

 She threw the stone. It missed. The lizard sprang onto the long nimble claws on its feet and scurried 
away into the maze of rocks. Ciri threw herself down flat on the stone, and drank the remains of the 
water from the fissure. It was then she saw it. 

 Behind the stone in a round nest, lay seven eggs partially protruding from the red sand. She did not 
hesitate for a moment. She approached the nest on her knees, grabbed one of the eggs and fixed her 
teeth in it. The leathery shell burst and a sticky ooze ran down her hands and flowed into her sleeve. 
Ciri sucked on the egg and licked her hand. She swallowed with difficulty and did not notice the taste. 

 She sipped the eggs and remained down on her hands and knees, sticky, dirty, covered in sand with 
gluten hanging from her teeth, frantically digging in the sand and uttering inhuman, weeping sounds. 
She froze. 

 (Straighten up, Princess! Don not put your elbows on the table! Be careful when you reach for the 
plate, or you'll dirt the lace on your sleeves! Wipe your mouth with a napkin and stop smacking your 
lips! By the gods, has no one taught you child how to behave at a table? Cirilla!) 

 Ciri began to cry, her head resting on her knees. 

 

*** 

 

 She lasted until noon, then the heat of the day forced her to rest. She slept for a long time, hidden in 
the shadow of an overhanging rock. The shadow was not cold, but it was better than the burning sun. 
Thirst and hunger drove away sleep. 

 The distant mountain range, seemed to be on fire with the shining sunlight. At the top of those 
mountains, she thought, there could be snow, there could be ice, and there could be streams. I have to 
get there. I have to get there quickly. 

 She walked for almost the whole night. She decided to follow the stars. The whole sky was covered 
in stars. Ciri regretted not having paid attention in lessons and not wanting to study the atlas of the sky 
in the Temple library. She knew, of course, the most important constellations: The Seven Goats, the 
Vase, the Serpent, the Dragon and the Lady of Winter, but they were too high in the sky and it was 
difficult to rely on them during the march. 

 She managed to finally choose from a bright star, which indicated in her opinion, the right 
direction. She didn't know what the star was called, so she gave it a name. 

 She called it the Eye. 

 

*** 

 

 She walked. The mountain range which was her target was not one bit closer, it was still as far 
away as it was the previous day. But it showed the way. 

 As she walked, she looked around intently. She found another lizard's nest with four eggs in it. She 
spotted a green plant, which was no longer than her little finger, which somehow managed to grow 
between the boulders. She tracked down a large brown beetle. And a thin legged spider. 

 She ate everything. 

 

*** 

 


 At noon she threw up what she ate, and then fainted. When she awoke, she looked for a bit of 
shadow to curl up in, clutching her hands to her aching stomach. 

 At sunset, she began to march again. Stiffly, like an automaton. Several times she fell but got up 
again and walked on. 

 She walked. She had to go on. 

 

*** 

 

 Evening. Rest. Night. The Eye leads the way. March until complete exhaustion, which arrived well 
before sunrise. Rest. A little sleep. Hunger. Cold. There was no magical sources, failure to conjure 
heat and light. Only the intense desire to lick the dew in the morning from the sword blade and the 
stones. 

 When the sun rose, she fell asleep in the growing heat. She was awakened by a searing heat. She 
got up and kept going. 

 She fainted after less than an hour's walk. When she came back to her senses, the sun was at its 
zenith, beating down. She did not have the strength to seek shade. She had no strength to stand. But 
she got up. 

 She walked. She did not give up. For almost the entire day and part of the night. 

 

*** 

 

 Once again during the hottest part of the day she slept, curled up under an overhanging boulder 
stuck in the sand. The sleep was light and tormenting. She dreamed of water, water that she could 
drink. A large white waterfall, surrounded by mist and rainbows. A babbling brook. A small spring in 
the woods, obscured by ferns submerged in the water. Fragrant, wet marble palace fountains. Mossy 
wells and tubs overflowing... Drops dripping from melting icicles... Water. Cold, crisp water that 
makes her teeth hurt, but it tastes wonderful and unforgettable... 

 She awoke and jumped to her feet and began to walk in the direction from which it came. Again, 
stumbling and falling. She had to get back! She had walked past the water! She had left behind a 
steam gurgling among the rocks! How could she have been so stupid! 

 She came to her senses. 

 The heat abated, approaching evening. The sun pointed to the west. To the mountains. The sun had 
no right to be right behind her. Ciri expelled her delusions and stopped her crying. She turned and 
walked on. 

 

*** 

 

 She walked all night, but very slowly. She did not get far. She dozed off on the march, dreaming of 
water. The rising sun found her sitting on a stone block, staring at her sword blade and bare forearm. 

 Blood is liquid. You can drink it. 

 She expelled the delusions and nightmares. Licked the dewy sword blade and continued walking. 

 

*** 

 

 She fainted again. When she came to her senses, she was lying on hot stones, burning in the sun. 

 Before her, through the quivering curtain of heat, she was the jagged toothed chain of mountains. 

 Closer. Much closer. 

 However she had no strength left. She sat down. 

 The sword in her hand reflected the burning sun. It was sharp. She knew it. 

 'Why are you tormenting yourself?' asked the serious and calm voice of the pedantic sorceress 
called Tissaia de Vries. "Why prolong the suffering? Finally be done with it!' 

 'No. I will not surrender.' 


 'You do not understand. Do you know how you die of thirst? At any time you will become mad and 
then it will be too late. Then you will no longer know how to finish it.' 

 'No. I will not surrender. I will endure.' 

 She put her sword back into its sheath. Rose, staggered, fell. She rose once more, staggered and 
began to walk. 

 Above her, high in the yellow sky, she saw a vulture. 

 

*** 

 

 When she regained consciousness, she did not remember when she fell. She could not remember 
how long she had been lying there. She looked up. Two other vultures had joined the other one 
circling around in the sky. She did not have enough strength to get up. 

 She realized that this was the end. She accepted this calmly. Even with relief, 

 

*** 

 

 Something touched her. 

 Something lightly and carefully touched her arm. After a long period of solitude, where only dead 
and motionless stones had surrounded her, the contact caused, despite her exhaustion, her to suddenly 
jump up, or at least try to jump up. The thing that had touched her backed away, making a loud 
stamping. 

 With an effort, Ciri sat back down, rubbing her bleary eyes with her fingers. 

 I've gone mad, she thought. 

 A few paces in front of her stood a horse. She blinked. It was not an illusion. It was a real horse. A 
little horse. A young horse, almost a foal. 

 She regained control of herself. She licked her cracked lips and cleared her throat involuntary. The 
little horse scampered back, grinding gravel beneath its hooves. It moved very strangely and its coat 
was an unusual colour, a bay or grey. But perhaps it only seemed so because it stood against the sun. 

 The little horse snorted and took a few steps towards her. Now she could see it better. So much so 
that in addition to the unusual colour, she also saw other strange anomalies on its body: a small head, 
the unusual slenderness of its neck, thin hocks and a long rich tail. The horse stopped and looked at 
her, turning its head in profile. Ciri sighed silently. 

 From the sloping forehead of the horse protruded a horn at least two spans long. 

 Impossible. Impossible, thought Ciri, regaining consciousness and collecting her thoughts. 
Unicorns do not exist on this world, they have become extinct! Even in the books at the witcher's 
keep – Kaer Morhen there are no unicorns! I only read about them in books about myths at the 
Temple... Oh, and in the book Physiologus which I read in the bank of Mr Giancardi there was an 
illustration of a unicorn... But the unicorn in the illustration looked more like a goat than a horse, it 
had a hairy goatee and its horns, I think, were about two cubits... 

 She was surprised that she remembered those events, they felt like they had happened a hundred 
years ago. Her head suddenly started to spin and her bowels twisted in pain. She moaned and curled 
into a ball. The unicorn snorted and stepped towards her then stopped and raised its head high. Ciri 
suddenly recalled what the book had said about unicorns. 

 'Feel free to approach...' Ciri croaked, trying to sit down again. 'You can, because I'm...' 

 The unicorn snorted, moved back and galloped away, waving its sharply. But after a moment it 
stopped, shook its head, pawed at the ground with its hooves and whinnied loudly. 

 'Not true!' Ciri cried, sobbing. 'Jarre just gave me a kiss and that doesn't count! Come back!' 

 The effort obscured her sight and she feel lifelessly onto the stone. When at last she lifted her head, 
the unicorn was again standing close by. He looked at her inquiringly, bowed his head and snorted 
softly. 

 'Don't be afraid of me...' she whispered. 'You don't have to be, because... Because after all, I'm 
dying...' 

 The unicorn whinnied, shaking its head. Ciri fainted. 


 

*** 

 

 When she awoke she was alone. Sore, stiff, thirsty, hungry and alone as a thumb. The unicorn had 
been a mirage, an illusion, a dream. And it had vanished just like a dream disappears. She understood 
it, accepted it, and yet she was filled with sorrow and despair, as if the creature really existed, had 
been with her and then abandoned her. Just like everyone abandoned her. 

 She wanted to get up but could not. She rested her face on the rocks. Gradually she moved her hand 
to her side, fondling the hilt of her sword. 

 Blood is liquid. I have to drink. 

 She heard a pounding of hooves and a whinny. 

 'You came back...' she whispered, lifting her head. 'You really came back?' 

 The unicorn gave a loud whinny. She saw its hooves close beside her. The hooves were wet. 
Dripping with water. 

 

*** 

 

Hope gave her strength and filled her with euphoria. The unicorn lead the way and Ciri walked behind 
it, still not sure whether this was a dream or not. However, exhaustion eventually overcame her and 
she got down onto her hands and knees. Then she crawled. 

 The unicorns lead her between the rocks to a shallow ravine, whose bottom was covered in sand. 
With her remaining strength, Ciri crawled. She crawled. Because the sand was wet. 

 The unicorn stood before a recess in the sand, snorted and scratched with its hooves, once, twice, 
three times. She understood. Ciri crawled closer to help it. She dug, breaking fingernails, clawing the 
sand aside. She sobbed while she dug, but she was unsure why. At the bottom of the recess a muddy 
liquid appeared, she immediately put her lips to it and swallowed the murky water along with the 
sand, so eagerly that the liquid disappeared. With great effort Ciri controlled herself and continued to 
deepen the hole with the help of her sword, then sat and waited. Grinding the sand that was between 
her teeth and trembling with impatience, but she waited until the recess was filled with water again. 
And then she drank. For a long time. 

 On the third occasion she allowed the water stand for a bit then drank four swallows without sand 
or silt. Then she remembered the unicorn. 

 'Surely you're thirsty to horse.' She said. 'But you won't drink mud. No horse drinks mud.' 

 The unicorn snorted. 

 Ciri deepened the hole further, reinforcing its edges with rocks. 

 'Wait, horse. Rest for a bit...' 

 "Little Horse" snorted and kicked and turned its head. 

 'Don't look sideways at it. Drink.' 

 The unicorn approached the water with caution. 

 'Drink, Little Horse. It is not a dream. It's real water.' 

 

*** 

 

 Ciri, at first was reluctant to move away from the spring. She had just invented a new way of 
drinking involving squeezing a soaked handkerchief into her mouth, allowing her to remove a large 
amount of the sand and silt. But the unicorn neighed and stamped its hooves insistent that they leave, 
showing her the path again. Ciri, after thinking it over, obeyed thinking the animal was correct, she 
had to keep walking, walking towards the mountains and out of the desert. She went after the unicorn, 
first looking around and etching in her mind the location of the spring. She did not want to miss it if 
she had to come back here. 

 They walked all day. The unicorn, which she had named Little Horse, lead the way. It was a strange 
horse. Biting and chewing weeds that a normal horse would not touch not even the hungriest of goats. 


And when he discovered a column of ants walking on a rock, he began to eat them. Ciri at first 
regarded him with astonishment, then joined in the feast. She was hungry. 

 The ants were terribly acidic and they made her want to avoid vomit. There were a lot of ants and 
she could exercise some control. The unicorn ate a lot of the ants until he's stomach was content, 
spitting out the touch chitinous shell fragments. 

 They walked on. The unicorn found yellowing patches of thistles and ate them with gusto. The time 
Ciri did not join him. But when Little Horse found another batch of lizard eggs in the sand, she ate 
them all while he watched. Sometime later, Little Horse called her attention to a large black scorpion 
with a tail at least half an inch long. Ciri crushed it with her boot. Seeing that she was not going to eat 
the scorpion, the unicorn ate it himself, and soon after he pointed out another lizards nest. 

 It turned out to be quite a tolerable collaboration. 

 

*** 

 

 They kept walking. 

 The mountain range was getting closer. 

 When night fell, the unicorn stopped. He fell asleep standing up. Ciri who knew horses, initially try 
to force him to lie down, so she could try and sleep on him and take advantage of his heat. But it was 
no good. Little Horse glanced at her and walked away, maintaining a constant distance. They did not 
behave this way in the classical way, or as they were described in the books of scholars. Apparently he 
had not the slightest intention of putting his head in her lap. Ciri was full of doubt. She did not 
disregard the accounts in the books about unicorns and virgins, but there was also another possibility. 
The unicorn was clearly a unicorn foal, maybe as a young beast, he had no damn idea that she was a 
virgin. She dismissed the possibility that Little Horse was able to perceive and take seriously those 
strange dreams she had dreamed. Who could take those dreams seriously? 

 

*** 

 

 The unicorn disappointed her a little. They had walked for two days and two nights, and although 
they were looking they found no more water. Several times he stopped, shook his head and waved his 
horn, then trotted through a rocky ravine which he scraped in the sand with his hooves. He found ants 
and ant eggs and larvae. He found lizards nest. He found a coloured snake, which he skilfully stamped 
to death. But he found no water. 

 Ciri realized that the unicorn plainly did not hold to a straight line of march. She had a reasonable 
suspicion that he did not live in the desert. He was simply lost. Just like her. 

 

*** 

 

 The ants, which began to be found in abundance, contained an acidic moisture, but Ciri began 
thinking more and more seriously about returning to the spring. If they went much further and didn't 
find any water, she would not have enough strength to return. The heat was still terrible, draining 
them while they walked. 

 She already had intentions to start explain this to Little Horse, when suddenly he gave a shrill 
whinny, waved his tail and galloped down between some jagged rocks. Ciri quickly followed, as she 
ate ants. 

 A large space between the rocks was covered with a layer of sand and in its centre was a clear 
recess. 

 'Ha!' Ciri cheered. 'You're a very smart horse, Little Horse. You found another spring. There must 
be water down there!' 

 The unicorn snorted sharply and trotted around the cleft. Ciri approached. The cleft was large, at 
least twenty feet in diameter. It was a precise and neat circle, resembling a funnel, it was so regular 
that it looked as if someone had left a giant egg in the sand. Ciri suddenly realized that a regular shape 
such as this could not have been created by itself. 


 But it was too late. 

 Something moved in the crater and a violent storm erupted flinging sand and gravel into Ciri's face. 
She jumped back, fell and saw that she was going down. 

 A shooting fountain of gravel that had hit her also hit the edges of the crater and the waves started 
to drag her downwards. She screamed and started waving her arms like a swimmer, trying 
unsuccessfully to find support for her feet. She immediately realized that thrashing around only 
worsened the situation, force the sand to collapse faster. She rolled onto her back and spread out her 
hands and feet. The sand at the bottom of the crater started to move and ripple, there emerging from 
the sand were bronze coloured pincers, more than half a fathom long ending in hooks. She screamed 
again, this time much louder. 

 The storm of gravel that was showering suddenly ceased. On the opposite side of the crate the 
unicorn was supported by only its hind legs, he neighed like a demon, as the edge of the cleft started 
to sink under his hooves. He tried to break free of the sand, but was in vain. He sank in more and more 
rapidly, slipping towards the bottom. The horrible claws snapped sharply. The unicorn snorted 
desperately, flailing, striking the crumbling sand impotently with his front hooves. His hind legs 
where completely trapped. When he slid to the very bottom of the crater, the monster hiding in the 
sand snapped it horrible claws. 

 Hearing a wild shriek of pain, Ciri screamed wildly and threw herself down into the crater, drawing 
her sword from its sheath. Once she reached the bottom, she realized she had made a mistake. The 
monster was hiding deep in the sand, where the sword could not reach. To make matters worse, the 
unicorn held by the monstrous claw was being dragged into the sand trap, the pain was making him go 
crazy screaming and hitting blindly with his front legs, which threatened to break her bones. 

 Her witcher training and tricks were worth nothing down here. But there was a fairly simple spell. 
Ciri conjured Force and launched a telekinetic blow. 

 A cloud of dirt flew into the air, revealing the hidden monster that had grasped the leg of the 
unicorn. Ciri screamed in horror. She had never seen anything so disgusting in any illustration in the 
books of the Witchers. She could not even image something so awful. 

 The monster was a dirty gray, dull and squat like a bug sated on blood, sparse bristles covered the 
narrow segments of its barrel-shaped body. It seemed that it had no legs at all, instead it had claws 
which were almost as large as she was. 

 Deprives of sandy cover the creature let go of the unicorn and immediately began to burrow with 
fast, jerky movements of its huge body. It did this with extraordinary skill and the unicorn, trying to 
escape the crater, helped by pushing down waves of sand. Ciri was seized by rage and a lust for 
revenge. She threw herself on the now barely visible abomination and thrust her sword into its back. 
She attacked from behind, cautiously keeping away from the snapping pincers of the monster, as it 
turned out it was able to reach pretty far back. She struck again, but the creature burrowed at an 
amazing pace. But it did not bury itself in the sand to escape. It did it in order to attack. He had no 
more than two more seizures before he was hidden from them again. Once hidden, it launched a wave 
of gravel at Ciri which buried her to mid-thigh. She struggled and tried to step back, but there was 
nowhere to flee to, it had turned into a crater of quicksand, every movement dragged the closer to the 
bottom. The sand bottom stirred and formed a wave directed at her, a wave that contained snapping 
claws, ending in sharp hooks. 

 Little Horse saved her. Charging to the crater floor, striking his hooves on an area of sand that was 
bulging, which betrayed the hiding place of the monster. His wild kicks revealed a gray back. The 
unicorn lowered his head and stuck his horn into the monster, into the joint of the torso, were the 
claws couldn't reach. Seeing the pincers of the monster hit the ground helplessly clawing at the sand, 
Ciri jumped and using the momentum drove her sword into its body. She pulled it out and struck 
again. And again. The unicorn pulled his horn free and put his hooves onto the barrel-shaped body. 

 The monster did not try to bury itself anymore. It was not moving at all. The sand surrounding it 
was wet with a greenish fluid. 

 With difficulty, Ciri climbed out of the crater. Ciri took a few steps, and then fell limply onto the 
sand, panting and shivering as waves of adrenaline pounded in her temples and throat. The unicorn 
walked around her. He stepped awkwardly, a wound in his thigh was pouring blood, flowing down his 


leg in sheets, leaving red stains on the sand. Ciri got up on her hands and knees and vomited violently. 
After a while she got up and stumbled towards the unicorn, but Little Horse would not let her touch 
him. He moved ran further away, after which he threw himself on the sand and rolled around. He then 
cleaned his horn by stabbing it several times into the sand. 

 Ciri also cleaned and wiped the blade of her sword, looking uneasily from time to time at the 
nearby crater. The unicorn stood up, whinnied and approached her at a walk. 

 'I'd like to examine your wound Little Horse.' Little Horse whinnied and shook his horned head. 

 'If not, no. If you can walk, we'd better go. We had better not stay here.' 

 

*** 

 

 Soon they came across a large sandy shoal dotted with craters, which reached to the edge of the 
rocks around it. Ciri looked at in apprehension – some of the craters were twice as large as the one 
which not long ago they had been fighting for their lives in. 

 They dared not cross the shoal dodging crater. Ciri was convinced that the craters were traps for 
unsuspecting victims and that monsters were hidden beneath lying in wait with their large claws 
waiting for victims to fall in. By taking care and keeping away from the pits, the sandy terrain could 
cross the without fear that any of the monster would leave the pits and pursue them. She was sure that 
there was no risk, but she wished to avoid testing her theory. The unicorn was of the same opinion, he 
snorted, whinnied and ran around about then away from the shoals of sand. They decided on a lengthy 
path around the dangerous territory, remaining on the firm and rocky terrain, in which none of the 
beasts would be able to bury itself. 

 As they walked, Ciri did not take her eyes off of the craters. Sometimes she saw the deadly traps 
firing jets of sand into the air – the monsters deepening and renewing their burrows. Some craters 
were so close to each other that the gravel thrown by one monster fell into the other holes, alarming 
the creatures hidden at the bottom, which then began a terrible cannonade and for a few minutes the 
sand rained and whistled around like hail. 

 Ciri wandered what the sand monsters hunted in the dry and lifeless desert. The answer came a 
moment later. From one of the holes closest to her a dark object flew in a wide arc and fell not far 
from them. After a moment's hesitation, Ciri ran from the rocks onto the sand. The object that had 
flown from the crater was a dead rodent that resembled a rabbit. At least the fur did. It was a shrunken 
corpse, hard and dry as chips, light and empty as a bladder. Not a single drop of blood remained in it. 
Ciri shuddered. Know she knew what the monsters hunted and how they fed. 

 The unicorn gave a warning snort. Ciri raised her head. In their vicinity there was no crater, the 
sand was even and smooth. But suddenly, before her eyes, the smooth sand began to swell into a lump 
and started moving in their direction. She left the dry little body of the rodent and jumped back up to 
the rocks. 

 The decision to avoid the shoal had proved to be the correct one. 

 They walked on, avoiding even the smallest patches of sand, stepping only on solid ground. 

 The unicorn was walking slowly, stumbling. Blood was gushing from his injured thigh. But he 
would still not allow Ciri to approach and examine the wound. 

 

*** 

 

 The shoal narrowed considerably and began to meander. Fine and loose sand gave way to gravel 
and heavy boulders. Since they no longer saw craters, they decided to walk along the path indicated 
by the sandbank. Ciri although again tortured by hunger and thirst, began to move faster. There was 
hope. The rocky shoal was not a shoal. It was the bed of a river flowing towards the mountains. The 
river was dry, but it would lead to the source, the water was too weak and inefficient to fill the trough, 
but there would probably be enough to drink. 

 She walked faster, but had to slow her pace. The unicorn had slowed down. He trotted along with 
visible effort, stumbled, entangling his legs. When evening came, he lay down. He didn't stand up 
when she approached him. He allowed her to examine the wound. 


 There were two wounds on both sides of the thigh, swollen and hot. Both wounds were bleeding, 
along with the blood a sticky smelly pus flowed. 

 The monster had been poisonous. 

 

*** 

 

 The next day was even worse. The unicorn could hardly walk. In the afternoon he lay down on 
some rocks and refused to rise. When Ciri knelt before him and touched his wounded thigh, he 
whinnied. In that whinny was pain. 

 The pus flowed more strongly now, the stench was sickening. Ciri drew her sword. The unicorn 
with a shrill bleat, tried to rise but fell to his haunches on the stone. 

 'I don't know what to do...' Ciri sobbed, looking at the blade. 'I don't know... I probably have to 
cut the wound to remove the pus and poison... But I don't know! I could cause you more harm!' 

 The unicorn tried to lift his head and whinnied. Ciri sat on the rocks holding his head in her hands. 

 'I haven't been taught how to heal," she said bitterly. 'they taught me to kill, saying that this was 
the way to save lives. It was a big lie, Little Horse. A Lie.' 

 Night fell quickly. The unicorn is dying, Ciri thought feverishly. She went and collected thistles 
and stalks that grew in abundance on the banks of the dry river bed, but Little Horse would not eat. He 
put his head on the rocks and did not attempt to lift it. Only blinking. From his nose foam started to 
appear. 

 'I can't help you, Little Horse' Ciri said her voice choked. 'I do not have anything...' 

 Except for magic. 

 I am a sorceress. 

 She rose, extending her hand. And nothing. She needed a lot of magical energy, and there was no 
trace. She was surprise, she had not expected this. After all, water veins are everywhere she took a few 
steps in one direction, then in another. She began to walk in a wide circle. She made a full rotation. 

 Nothing. 

 'Cursed desert!' she shouted, clenching her fist. 'There is nothing in you! No water, no magic! 
They said that magic is everywhere! That was a lie too! They have all lied, everyone!' 

 The unicorn snorted. 

 The magic is everywhere. In the water, on land, air... 

 And in the fire. 

 Ciri smacked her fist to her forehead in rage. Up until now there had been nothing but bare stones 
which would not burn. But now she had dry thistles and stalks at hand, and with what little energy she 
had left within herself she could manage a little spark... 

 She gathered more sticks and placed them in a pile then covered them with dry thistles. She 
cautiously raised her hand. 

 'Aenye!' 

 The little pile flared, and a flame flicked and sprang up, it reached towards the leaves and devoured 
them shooting higher. Ciri added more stalks. 

 'Now what,' she thought, watching the flames come alive. 'How do I draw energy from it?' 

 Yennefer forbade me to touch the energy of fire... But I have no choice! No time! I have to act now 
The stalks and leaves will soon burn... The fire will go out... Fire... It is beautiful, and warm... 

 She did not know when or how it happened. She was watching the flames and suddenly felt a 
throbbing in her temples. She clutched her chest, she felt like her ribs would explode. A pain echoed 
in her lower abdomen, crotch and nipples, pain the momentarily transformed into a terrifying pleasure. 
She stood up. No, not stood up. She flew. 

 The Force filled her like molten lead. Stars danced in the sky as if reflected off the surface of a 
pond. The Eye burned in the west, and exploded in brightness. She took the brightness, and with it 
power. 

 'Hael, Aenye!' 

 The unicorn whinnied wildly and tried to stand, leaning on its front legs. Ciri's arm lifted by itself, 
her hand moved by itself in a magical gesture, her lips shouted an incantation. 


 From her fingers came a rippling bright light. The flames of the fire raged. 

 The light waves that came from her hand touched the wounded thigh of the unicorn, focused and 
then penetrated. 

 'I want you to be healed! I want it! Vess'hael, Aenye!' 

 The Force exploded in her, she was filled with a wild euphoria. The fire shot upwards, brightening. 
The unicorn lifted his head, whinnied, then suddenly sprang up quickly from the ground, took a few 
steps, extended his neck and touched his thigh with his nose then snorted as if in disbelief. He released 
a high, piercing whinny, kicked and swished his tail and then galloped away from the fire. 

 'I've healed him!' Ciri shouted proudly. 'I've healed him! I am a sorceress! I managed to draw the 
Force out of the fire! And I have the Force! With it I can do anything!' 

 She turned. The fire roared, throwing sparks around. 

 'We no longer need to look for a source! We will not have to drink mud! Now I have power! I feel 
the Force that is in the fire! I will make it rain on this damn desert! Water will burst from the rocks! 
Flowers will bloom here! Grass! Kale! I can do anything now! Everything!' 

 She sharply raised both hands, shouting, chanting incantations and invocations. She did not 
understand them, did not remember when or if she had ever been taught them. It did not matter. She 
felt the Force, felt the power burning with fire. She was the fire. She trembled from the power 
coursing through her. 

 The night sky suddenly erupted with lightning, among the rocks and thistles the wind began to 
howl. The unicorn whinnied and reared. The fire erupted upwards, exploding. The sticks and stalks 
that she had collected had been used up already, now the rocks burned. But Ciri paid no attention to 
this. She felt the Force. She saw only the fire. She heard only the fire. 

 You can do everything, whispered the flames, you have our strength, you can do anything. The 
world is at your feet. You are great. You are powerful. 

 Among the flames appeared a figure. A tall young woman with long, straight jet black hair. The 
woman laughed wildly, savagely as the fire whirled around her. 

 You are powerful! Those who have wronged you, do not know who you are! Get even! Make them 
pay! Make them all pay! Let them tremble with fear at your feet, hear their chattering teeth as they 
dare not loop up at your face! Make them beg for mercy! But show them no mercy! Make they pay! 
Make them pay for everything! Revenge! 

 Behind the dark haired lady was fire and smoke, smoke and rows of gallows, rows of poles, 
pitchforks and tables and piles of corpses. These were the bodies of Nilfgaardians, those who 
conquered and destroyed Cintra, who murdered the king and her grandmother Calanthe, those who 
killed people on the streets of the city. Swinging from a noose was a knight in black armour, the rope 
was creaking while a swirling murder of crows tried to peck at the eyes through the slits of a winged 
helmet. More gallows stretched away into the horizon, from them hung Scoia'tael, those who had 
killed Paulie in Kaedwen Dahlberg, and those who chased her on the island of Thanedd. On a pole, 
convulsed Vilgefortz the sorcerer, his beautiful and noble face was wrinkled and pale from the 
torment, the sharp and blood end of the pole was sticking out of his clavicle... Other sorcerers from 
Thanedd were kneeling on the floor, their hands tied behind their backs, sharpen poles awaited them... 

 Pole that had bundles of brushwood piled at their base, stretched to the horizon that shone with a 
smoke haze. On the nearest post, tied with chains was Triss Merigold... Beyond her was tied 
Margarita Laux-Antille... Mother Nenneke... Jarre... Fabio Sachs... 

 No. No. No. 

 Yes, screamed the black haired woman, death to them all, let them pay, despise them! They all 
wanted to damage or hurt you! Or may eventually want to hurt you! Despise them, because it has 
finally reached the times of contempt! Hatred, vengeance and death! Death to everybody! Death, 
sacrifice and blood! 

 Blood on your hands, blood on your clothes... 

 They betrayed you! They cheated you! Now you have the power to get even! 

 Yennefer, her lips cracked and broken, blood flowing from them, her hands and feet tied in chains, 
heavy chains attached to wet and dirty dungeon walls. Gathered around a scaffold a crowd yells, 
Dandelion the bard lays his head onto a stump, the blade of the executioner's axe flashes brightly. The 


whores gathered under the scaffold spread their handkerchiefs to collect the blood in them... The howl 
of the crowd drowns out the blow that shakes the whole platform... 

 The betrayed you! Lied and cheated! Everyone! You were a puppet to them, you were a puppet on a 
stick! They used you! Condemned you to hunger, the burning sun, the thirst, the misery, the 
loneliness! It is the time of contempt and revenge! You have the power! You are powerful! Let the 
whole world tremble before you! Let the whole world tremble before the Elder Blood! 

 Witchers were then brought to the gallows. Vesemir, Eskel, Coen, Lambert. And Geralt... Geralt 
falters, he is covered in blood... 

 'No!' 

 Around the fire, behind the wall of flames, a wild neighing, unicorns rears up, shaking their heads 
and beating his hooves. Their manes are as frayed as war banners, horns, long and sharp as swords. 
The unicorns are much larger then Little Horse. Where did they come from? How did so many of 
them get here? The flames roared higher, the black-haired woman raises her arms, her hands covered 
in blood. Her hair flowing in the heat. 

 Burn, burn, Falka! 

 'Go away! Go away! I do not want this! I do not want your power! Burn, Falka!' 

 'I do not want it!' 

 You want it! You want it! The desire and lust in you burns like a fire, pleasure enslaves you! This is 
the power, it is the Force, this is the power! The most delightful please in the world! 

 Lightning. Thunder. Wind. The pounding of hooves and neighing of crazed unicorns around the 
fire. 

 'I do not want this power! I do not want it! I renounce it!' 

 She did not know whether the fire faded or her eyes darkened. She fell, feeling on her face the first 
drops of rain. 

 

*** 

 

 We must kill the Being, she cannot be allowed to exist. The Being is Dangerous. Confirmation. 

 Denial. The Being did not call the power to herself. She did it to save Ihuarraquax. The Being was 
compassionate. Thanks to this Being Ihuarraquax is back among us. 

 But the Being has the Force. If she wanted to use... 

 She will not use it. Never. She renounced it. Completely. The Force has gone. It's very strange... 

 You never understand Beings. 

 I do not have to understand. End this Beings existence. Before it is too late. Confirmation. 

 Denial. Let us go. We will leave the Being to her Destiny. 

 

*** 

 

 She did not know how long she lay on the stones, shaking trembling, starring at the sky changing 
colours. It was alternately dark and light, cold and hot and she lay helpless, dry and empty like the 
skin of the rodent corpse, drained and spit out by the crater. 

 She did not think about anything. She was alone, empty. She had nothing and she did not feel 
anything within herself. There was no thirst, hunger, fatigue or fear. 

 She was dead, even the will to survive. There was just a great, cold, terrifying emptiness. She felt 
this emptiness throughout her whole being, with in every cell of her body. 

 She felt blood on the inside of her thigh. She was indifferent to it. She was empty. She had lost 
everything. 

 The sky changed colours. She did not move. Did it make sense to move in a void? 

 She did not move when she heard the sounds of hooves and horseshoes around her. She did not 
react to the loud cheers and shouts, the excited voices, the snorting of the horses. She did not move 
when the strong hands grabbed her hard. She was lifted from the ground and hung limp and 
powerless. She did not respond to the jerking and shaking or for the sharp, abrupt questions. She did 
not understand them and did not want to understand. 


 She was empty and indifferent. She accepted with indifference the water that was splashed onto her 
face. When they put the canteen to her lips she drank. Indifferent. 

 She was indifferent as well when they hoisted her in to the saddle. Her groin was sensitive and 
sore. She was trembling, so they wrapped her in a blanket. She was limp and weak and kept slipping 
from the saddle, so they tied her with a belt to the rider who sat behind her. The rider stank of sweat 
and urine. She was indifferent. 

 All around her were riders. And many horses. Ciri looked at them indifferently. She was empty, 
she'd lost everything. Nothing mattered. 

 Nothing. 

 Not even the fact that the knight who commanded the riders wore a helmet with the wings of a bird 
of prey. 

 

 


"When the criminal's stake had been lit and the flames reached her, she began insulting all the 
knights, barons, mages and councillors gathered in the square in such foul language that they were 
all filled with dread. Though wet logs had been stacked to prevent the hag from burning too quickly 
and provide her a chance to suffer in the flames, dry wood was soon added to the fire to end the 
execution more swiftly. 

 

She must truly have harboured a demon inside her as she uttered not a single scream though she 
sizzled fair enough. Instead, she began cursing horribly. 

 

"An avenger shall be born from my own blood," she cried. "From the defiled Elder Blood, a destroyer 
of nations and worlds will rise! He shall avenge my torment! Death, death and revenge upon you and 
your offspring!" That was all she managed to articulate before she perished. Such was the death 
of Falka, her punishment for the innocent blood she had spilled." 

by Roderick de Novembre 

History of the World Volume III 

 

 

