Chapter One 

 

In order to make a living as a courier, Aplegatt used to say to the youngsters applying in the ranks, 
two things are needed - a head of gold and an ass of steel. 

A head of gold is indispensable, taught Aplegatt, since inside of the leather sack under his clothes 
the courier keeps only messages of low importance, the kind that can be fearlessly entrusted to the 
treacherous paper. The truly important, secret messages, the kind that matter a lot, the courier must 
memorize and tell the one whom they are intended for. Word by word, and sometimes these are not 
simple words. Hard to pronounce, much less memorize. In order to remember and make no mistake in 
repeating one needs truly a head of gold. 

As for an ass of steel, well, that every courier will find out by himself. After having spent three 
days and nights in the saddle and having run for a hundred or even two hundred miles on rocky roads. 
Ha, sure, one does not sit in the saddle all day long, one dismounts sometimes to rest. The human can 
withstand much, but the horse cannot. But when time comes to go back in the saddle, the rear 
sometimes yells 'God, no!' 

But who needs couriers nowadays Master Aplegatt, asked the youngsters. From Vengerberg to 
Vizima, for example, one cannot pass the distance in less than four or five days, even on the fastest 
mount. And how much does a wizard in Vengerberg need to pass the message to wizard in Vizima? 
Half an hour at most. Courier's horse might go limp. Robbers or Squirrels might shoot him, wolves or 
gryphons might rip him apart. One minute there's a courier, the next he's gone. While a magic 
message will reach destination point for sure, won't lose the way, be late or become lost. Who needs 
couriers with wizards everywhere, close to every castle? 

Couriers are not needed anymore, Master Aplegatt. 

For some time Aplegatt also thought that he's not needed by anybody anymore. He was thirty-six, 
short but strong and sinewy, hard work didn't scare him and he had, naturally, a head of gold. He 
could find another job to feed himself and his wife, save some money for his two unwed as of yet 
daughters' dowry and keep helping the one who was wed already, but whose dim-witted husband had 
no luck in business. But Aplegatt didn't want to and couldn't imagine himself doing anything else. He 
was the Royal Messenger. 

And suddenly, after a long and painful period of obscurity and inactivity, Aplegatt became needed 
once more. The hooves thundered on the roads once again. The couriers, like during good old days, 
again started crossing the country carrying messages from one settlement to another. 

Aplegatt knew why it was so. He saw a lot, and heard even more. He was expected to wipe the 
passed message from his mind immediately, so as not to be reminded of it even during torture. But 
Aplegatt did remember. And understood why kings suddenly stopped communicating with each other 
by the use of magic and help from wizards. The messages carried by couriers were supposed to be 
kept secret from the magicians. The kings lost trust in the wizards, stopped sharing with them their 
secrets. 


What was the cause of this sudden cooling in relations between kings and wizards, Aplegatt didn't 
know and didn't care much about. Both were, in his opinion, inconceivable creatures whose moves 
were incomprehensible – particularly now, in such difficult times. And the fact that difficult times 
were approaching was hard to miss while travelling the land from one city to another, one castle to 
another, one kingdom to another. 

There were loads of soldiers on the roads. Each new step brought new rows of infantry or ride and 
each new commander was angry, alarmed, harsh and so sure of his own importance as if fate of the 
entire world depended on him alone. Also, settlements and castles were full of armed crowds, hustle 
and bustle day and night. The usually unseen counts and castellans were marching restlessly on the 
walls and courtyards, angry like wasps before the storm, they yelled, swore, gave orders and kicks. 

In other words, the threat of war hung over them in the air. 

Aplegatt rose and looked around. Downhill was a river and behind it were forests. The courier 
rushed his horse. Time was pressing on. 

He was on his way for the past two days. King's orders and letters found him in Hagge, where he 
was resting after his return from Tretogor. He left the castle at night, galloping along the left bank of 
Pontar, he crossed the border of Temeria before dawn and now, at noon of the following day, he was 
already near the bank of Ismena. Had king Foltest stayed at Vizima, Aplegatt would have handed him 
the message just this night. Unfortunately, the king was not in the capital – he stayed in the southern 
part of his country, in Maribor, two hundred miles away from Vizima. Aplegatt knew this, which is 
why in the vicinity of the White Bridge he left the main, west-leading road in favour of forest paths in 
the direction of Ellander. It was a bit risky. The Squirrels still prowled the forests and pitiful was the 
lot of one who got in their arms or found himself in the range of their bows. But the royal messenger 
must take risks. Such is his work. 

He crossed the river with no trouble – there was no rain from June and water level fell a lot. He 
reached the road leading from Vizima to south-east in the direction of dwarfish smithies and 
settlements inside the mountain Mahakam. There were many wagons on this road and Aplegatt sighed 
with relief. Scoia'tael kept away from crowds. Campaign against human-killing elves continued in 
Temeria for a year, the pursued Squirrel commandos split into smaller groups and smaller groups kept 
away from busy roads and didn't organize ambushes on them. 

Before the evening came he was already on the western border of Ellander principality, near 
Zavada village, from where he had a straight and safe way to Maribor. There was a tavern near the 
road. He decided to give a rest for himself and his horse. He knew that if he leaves at dawn then just 
before the sunset he will see silvery-black flags on the red roofs of Maribor towers. 

He took the saddle off the horse all by himself, ordering the stable boy to go away. The royal 
messenger never lets anyone touch his horse. He ate a solid meal. Drunk some bear. Listened to the 
news. There were lots of them. All sorts of travellers stayed in the tavern, from all parts of the world. 

In Dol Angra, heard Aplegatt, new incidents took place. Again, the Lyrian cavalry troops crashed 
on the border with Nilfgaardian ones. Again Meve, the Queen of Lyria, loudly accused Nilfgaard of a 
provocation and called the king of Aedirn, Demavend, for help. In Tretogor there was a public 
execution of a Redanian baron who secretly plotted with emissaries of the Nilfgaardian emperor 
Emhyr. In Kaedwen, joint Scoia'tael commandos massacred fortress Leyda. As retribution, the 
population of Ard Carraigh carried out a pogrom, murdering close to four hundred non-humans 
residing in the capital. 

In Temeria, said the merchants from the south, there's a sadness and despair among Cintrian 
emigrants, gathered under the banner of Marshal Vissegerd. It seemed that the terrible news of the 
death of Lion Cub, Calanthe's granddaughter princess Cirilla, had been confirmed. 

He also heard other, even more terrifying rumours. In villages near Aldesberg cows have suddenly 
started leaking blood from the udders and the Deathly Maiden, an omen of horrible disasters, was seen 
at a dawn in the fog. In Brugge, near Brokilon Forest, the forbidden kingdom of the Dryads, the Wild 
Hunt appeared and as everyone knows it is a sure omen of war. As for cape of Bremervoord, a 
phantom ship was spotted there and on its deck stood a wraith – black knight with the bird of prey 
wings on his helmet. 


The courier didn't listen very carefully; he was too tired for that. He laid down heavily on the bed 
and immediately fell asleep. 

He woke up at dawn. When he went outside he was surprised – he wasn't the first one to be getting 
ready for departure and that was a rare event. A black stallion stood next to the well and beside it a 
woman dressed in male clothing washed her hands in the trough. Hearing Aplegatt's footsteps she 
turned around and brushed away her long, black hair. The courier bowed. The woman nodded. 

Entering the stables he almost crashed with the second early bird, a young lady in velvet beret who 
was leading an apple mare. The girl rubbed her face and yawned, supporting herself with the help of 
the horse. 

'Oh my' she murmured, passing the courier 'I will fell asleep on the horse... I will fell asleep for 
sure... Uaauaaua...' 

'When the mare starts trotting, the chill will awake you' said Aplegatt taking the saddle off the 
belch 'Have a safe ride Miss.' 

The girl turned around and looked at him like she had just noticed him. Her eyes were big and 
green like a pair of emeralds. Aplegatt settled the saddle on the horse. 

'I wished you a safe ride' he repeated. Usually he wasn't very talkative but now he felt the need to 
talk with another person, even if that person was just a plain, sleepy brat. Perhaps it was due to the 
long days on the trail, or maybe it was because the girl reminded him of his middle daughter. 

'May the Gods watch over you' he added 'May they keep you from accidents and poor weather. 
There's only two of you and female at that... and times aren't good. Danger lurks everywhere.' 

The girl opened her eyes widely. The courier felt a cold shiver sliding down his spine. 

'Danger...' the girl said suddenly in a strange, changed voice 'The danger is quiet. You won't hear 
it getting closer on its grey feathers. I had a dream. The sand... The sand was warm from the sun...' 

'What?' Aplegatt froze 'What are talking about Miss? What sand?' 

The girl shuddered and wiped her face. The apple mare shook its head. 

'Ciri!' yelled the dark-haired woman outside 'Hurry up!' 

The girl yawned, looked at Aplegatt and blinked as if surprised by his presence. The courier was 
silent. 

'Ciri' spoke the woman again 'Have you fallen asleep over there?' 

'I'm coming, Miss Yennefer!' 

When Aplegatt finished saddling the horse and took it outside there was no sign of the woman or 
the girl. The courier jumped onto the stallion and remembered the green eyes of the sleepy girl, her 
strange words. Quiet danger? Grey feathers? Warm sand? She must have been feeble-minded, he 
decided. Many of such unfortunates could be seen around these days, insane lasses harmed by 
renegade soldiers or other thugs... Yes, she was crazy for sure. Or maybe just not quite awake yet? 
It's a wonder what people sometimes blabber about when still half-asleep. 

He shivered again and felt a tinge of pain between shoulder blades. He rubbed his back with a fist. 

The moment he was on the road to Maribor he forced his horse into a gallop. Time was pressing on. 

 

*** 

 

He didn't rest for long in Maribor – the day was not yet gone and the wind was already blowing in 
his ears. The new mount, straight from Mariborian stables, swept the road with its tail. Aplegatt's 
chest was pressed by the sack with diplomatic post. His rear hurt like hell. 

'Pfeh, may yer break yor neck, yer damn yob!' yelled some cart driver behind him while calming 
the horse scared by the galloping stallion 'He runs like death itself were lickin' his toes! Yer won't 
escape the Reaper!' 

Aplegatt wiped the dust from his eyes. 

The previous day he handed the post to king Foltest and then recited the secret message from king 
Demavend. 

Demavend to Foltest. All is ready in Dol Angra. The masqueraders are waiting for orders. Planned 
time of action: second night of November, after the new moon. The boats must land on the other side 
of the river two days later. 


A flock of crows flew over the path. They were flying to the east, in the direction of Mahakam, Dol 
Angra and Vengerberg. The courier kept repeating to himself contents of the secret message from the 
king of Temeria to the ruler of Aedirn. 

Foltest to Demavend. First: Postpone the action. Smartasses are preparing a convent in Thanedd. 
This convent might change a lot. Second: the search for the Lion Cub can be called off. It's 
confirmed. The Cub is dead. 

Aplegatt rushed his horse. Time was pressing on. 

 

*** 

 

The narrow path was blocked by carts. Aplegatt slowly approached the long column of vehicles. He 
realized right away that he won't be able to make his way past the jam. Turning away now would take 
too much time and the thought of going around the obstacle through the forest at dusk didn't make 
him happy at all. 

'What happened here?' he asked the drivers of the last cart in the column, two elderly men of 
which one looked asleep and the other looked dead 'Robbery? Squirrels? Speak! I'm in a hurry...' 

Before any of them had a chance to answer, shouts could be heard from the faraway head of the 
column. The drivers quickly jumped onto the wagons and whipped their horses and oxen. The column 
started moving ahead. The sleeping old man woke up while the dead-looking one opened his eyes and 
stared at Aplegatt. 

'How impatient.' he said 'Oi, sonny, yer sure are lucky. Had yer arrived here at noon, yer'd be 
standin' here with us waitin' for a free pass. We're all in an hurry, right, but we had ter wait. How ter 
get through the closed road?' 

'The road was closed? How come?' 

'Some terrible man-eater appeared here, sonny. Attacked a knight ridin' with his squire. It's said 
that the monster ripped knight's head off and horse's guts out. The squire managed ter flee and came 
back with dreadful tales of the path bein' painted all over with blood...' 

'What kind of monster?' asked Aplegatt 'a Dragon?' 

'No, not a dragon' said the other man 'They say 'mandygore' or sumfin' like that. The squire said 
that it's some sort of flyin' beast, right, terribly huge. And vicious! We thought: it'll eat the chuffin' 
knight and leave, but no! Son of a whore sat on the bloody path and stays there, right, hissin', right, 
barin' its fangs.... So, whoever got close and took a peek at the bleedin' monster left the bleedin' cart 
behind and run like hell. The bloody jam got a mile long and swamps are everywhere 'round, right, no 
way back or through. So we waited...' 

'So many hardy men!' snickered the courier 'And stood there like a stunned mullet. Should have 
grabbed axes and slayed the beast.' 

'Well, some tried' said the old man 'Three dwarves from the merchant's guard, and with them four 
conscripts on their way ter Carreras castle, right, to the army. The dwarves got terribly mauled and the 
conscripts...' 

'Chickened out' finished the other man and spat 'Run away the moment they saw that mandygore. 
Rumour has it that one crapped his pants. Oi, have a look, right, have a look, sonny, right there!' 

'I don't wish to' growled Aplegatt 'Crapped pants are of no interest to me.' 

'Not that! The monster! The dead monster! Warriors are puttin' it on a cart! See?' 

Aplegatt raised his head. Despite the gloom and curious mob he could see a huge carcass. Warriors 
lifted it up and threw it onto the cart. Horses, nervous from the stench, neighed. 

'No stopping!' yelled the soldier in command 'Drive ahead! No blocking the pass!' 

The elderly rushed the mules. Aplegatt rode along. 

'So it seems that the warriors did slay the monster after all?' 

'If only' snickered the elder 'Warriors, once they arrived, did nuffin' but yell on people. Stand still, 
move away, do this, do that. They didn't rush to the beast at all. They called for a witcher.' 

'For a witcher?' 

'Exactly' assured him the other man 'Someone recalled spottin' a witcher in a village nearby, so 
they called for him. He rode past us later on. White hair, ugly gob and a big sword. Less than an hour 


later someone yelled that road is clear, because the witcher killed the beast. So we started movin'. And 
that's when yer arrived.' 

'Ha!' murmured Aplegatt deep in thoughts 'I've been riding all over the world for so many years 
and yet I've never once seen a witcher. Did anyone watch him killing this monster?' 

'I saw!' yelled a boy with unruly hair approaching the cart from the other side 'I've seen 
everything! Struth! Coz' I stood next to the soldiers, right on the front.' 

'Do tell, kid.' 

 'Twas like this' started the boy 'The witcher came to the commander. Said his name's Gernant. 
Commander said that one name or another, he better get the job done. And he showed where the 
monster were. The witcher came up, stared for a while and said that it's an unusually big manticore 
and he'll slay it for two hundred crowns.' 

'Two hundred?' gasped the elderly 'Was he mad?' 

'Commander said same thing, 'cept a bit more naughtily. And the witcher answers that this is the 
final price and he doesn't give a damn, right, the creature can stay here 'till the bleedin' end of the 
chuffin' world for all he cares. Commander says he won't pay this much, right, he'd rather wait for it 
ter fly away. The witcher replies that it won't fly away, 'coz it's hungry and pissed. And even if it 
leaves, it'll come back soon 'coz it's his hunting trierri... teri... terotor...' 

'Stop blabbing, you little snot' growled the old man 'Say what happened next.' 

'I'm trying! So the witcher says this: the monster won't leave but it'll spend the whole night eatin' 
the knight's corpse - slowly, 'coz it's inside the armor, hard ter pick out. So then the merchants 
gathered and proposed collectin' together hundred crowns. But the witcher said that the beast is called 
a manticore and it's horribly dangerous, so they can shove those hundred crowns up their arses, 'coz 
he won't risk his own for this amount. It pissed the commander off and he yelled that such is the 
whores and witcher's lot to risk their arses. But the merchants must have feared that the witcher will 
get pissed too and so they agreed on hundred and fifty. And then the witcher took out his sword and 
went after the manticore. And the commander made a sign against evil after him, spat over his 
shoulder and said that such devilish freaks ought not ter walk on this earth. To which one merchant 
said that if the army slew the monsters, instead of messing around with elves in the woods, then there 
would be no need for witchers at all and that...' 

'Stop wasting time' interrupted the old man 'Tell us what you've seen.' 

'I' said the boy 'was busy looking after the witcher's mount, a chestnut mare with a white arrow.' 

'To hell with the mare! Did you see the witcher kill the monster?' 

'Errr... I didn't. I was pushed behind. Everybody was shoutin' and the horses were nervous, so...' 

'As I thought' sneered the elderly 'He didn't see shit, the little snot.' 

'But I've seen the witcher come back!' protested the boy 'And the commander, who had watched 
the whole thing, was pale like a ghost and said to his soldiers that it must be some magic or elvish 
tricks, 'coz a normal man can't possibly be so bloody fast with his sword. The witcher then collected 
money from the merchants, jumped on his mare and rode away.' 

'Hmm...' murmured Aplegatt 'Which way did he go? To Carreras? If so, then maybe I could catch 
up and have a look at him.' 

'No' said the boy 'He went to Dorian. He seemed to be in a hurry.' 

 

*** 

 

The witcher rarely dreamed of anything and even those infrequent dreams were quickly forgotten 
the following morning. Even the nightmares – and usually it was those that he had. 

This time it was also a nightmare, but the witcher could recall at least a fragment. From the 
whirlwind of unknown but unsettling figures, strange but alarming scenes and incomprehensible but 
disturbing words and sounds suddenly emerged a clear image. Ciri. Different from the one he 
remembered from Kaer Morhen. Her gray hair were longer – the same she had the first time he'd met 
her, in Brokilon. When she rode past him, he wanted to call her but couldn't find his voice. He wanted 
to run after her but felt like he was sinking in tar. And Ciri didn't seem to notice him, she kept 
galloping further in the night, between the old, twisted willows and alders which waved their limbs as 


if trying to catch her. And he could see that she was being chased. Pursued by a black horse with a 
rider in black armour, wearing a helmet adorned by the wings of a bird of prey. 

He couldn't move, he couldn't shout. He could only watch how the winged knight rides up to Ciri, 
catches her by the hair, pulls her off the horse and drags behind him. He could only watch how her 
face turns blue from the pain and her mouth opens in a silent scream. Wake up, he told himself, unable 
to withstand the terrifying vision. Wake up! Wake up right now! 

He woke up. 

He laid motionlessly for a long time, recalling the dream. Then he got up. He took a sack from 
under his pillow and recounted the money. Hundred and fifty for the manticore. Fifty for the fogger he 
killed in Carreras. And fifty for Burdorff's werewolf. 

Fifty for a werewolf. It was a lot for such an easy job. The werewolf didn't try to protect himself. 
Cornered inside a cave he kneeled and waited for the blow. The witcher felt sorry for him. 

But he needed this money. 

Less than an hour later he was travelling through the streets of Dorian, searching for the familiar 
alley and the familiar sign. 

 The sign read 'Codringher and Fenn, consultation and legal service'. Geralt however knew far too 
well that the service provided by Codringher and Fenn had little to do with law and the partners 
themselves had many reasons to stay away from its representatives. He also doubted that any of their 
clients knew the meaning of the word 'consultation'. 

In the lower tier of the building there were no doors; just a solid, heavily locked gate, probably 
leading to the stables. In order to get to the doors one needed to go to the back of the house, upstairs 
and then walk through a dark corridor. 

Geralt knocked and backed away. He knew that a mechanism installed in doors could shoot twenty 
inch long spikes from the concealed holes. In theory, the spikes were shot only when someone tried to 
pick the locks or when Codringher or Fenn pressed the triggering device but Geralt often had the 
chance of finding out that there are no perfectly reliable mechanisms and every each one of them 
sometimes activates even when it ought not to. 

There was likely some device inside of the doors, probably magical in nature, which identified the 
guests. Nobody from the inside ever asked for a name. The door opened and Codringher stood at it. 
Always Codringher, never Fenn. 

'Welcome, Geralt' said Codringher 'Come inside. And there's no need to be so nervous, I 
disassembled the device. Something broke inside it few days ago. It activated out of the sudden and 
finished off a salesman. Come! What sort of help do you require from me?' 

'No' the witcher entered the gloomy anteroom like always smelling of cats 'Not from you. From 
Fenn.' 

Codringher laughed loudly, confirming the witcher's suspicion that Fenn was an imaginary person, 
existing only to confuse the provosts, bailiffs, tax collectors and other unwelcome guests. 

They entered a room, a bit brighter than others. Geralt sat on the guest chair. On the armchair 
across from him settled Codringher, the man who demanded to be titled an 'advocate' and a man for 
whom there were no impossible things. Whenever someone had any troubles, problems, hardships – 
they went straight to Codringher. And then that troubled person suddenly acquired an indisputable 
proof of the treachery and dishonesty of their business partners. Got a bank loan with no unnecessary 
impediments. Collected money from a bankrupt debtor. Got inheritance, despite the rich uncle's 
threats of not leaving him a penny. His son left prison due to the lack of evidence, and the witnesses 
withdrew their claims. His daughter's untrustworthy admirer suddenly lost interest. His wife's lover 
had an unfortunate accident. And the hated enemy or any other bothersome individual stopped 
bothering – as a rule they disappeared without trace. 

Yes, whenever someone had troubles, they rode to Dorian, run to the firm 'Codringher and Fenn' 
and knocked on the mahogany doors. Then they saw 'advocate' Codringher, short, thin, with greyish 
hair and unhealthy skin of a person who doesn't get enough fresh air. Codringher led them to the 
room, sat in the armchair, put a big, black-white cat on his lap and stroked its fur. Both of them – 
Codringher and the cat – gazed at the guest with their creepy yellowish-green eyes. 


'I got your letter' Codringher and his cat gazed at the witcher with their yellowish-green eyes 'I 
was also visited by Dandelion. He was riding past Dorian a few weeks back. He told me a bit about 
your problems. But he said little. Very little.' 

'Is that so? What a surprise. That would have been the first time Dandelion didn't say too much.' 

'Dandelion' Codringher didn't smile 'said little, because he knew even less. And he didn't say all 
that he knew simply because you forbade him to do so. Where does this lack of trust come from? Even 
towards a colleague in profession?' 

Geralt snorted. Codringher would have pretended not to notice but he couldn't because the cat 
noticed. It opened its eyes widely, bared its fangs and hissed quietly. 

'Don't tease my cat' said the advocate petting the animal 'Are you insulted by being called my 
colleague? But it's true. I am also a witcher. I also save people from monsters and from monstrous 
troubles. And I'm also doing this for money.' 

'There are differences' uttered Geralt, still under cat's unfriendly gaze. 

'There are' agreed Codringher 'You are an anachronistic witcher whereas I am a modern one. 
Which is why you will soon be left jobless while I shall prosper. Soon there will be no strigas, 
wyverns, endriags and werewolves left on this world. And bastards will always exist.' 

'But you save from trouble mainly those bastards, Codringher. The troubled poor men can't afford 
your service.' 

'The troubled poor men can't afford your service either. Poor men can never afford anything, 
which is why they get called poor in the first place.' 

'What an unbelievably logical conclusion. And such a breathtaking discovery at that.' 

'One of the aspects of truth is that it's so breathtaking. And it is true that the backbone and 
foundation of both our professions is wickedness. Except yours is a diminishing relic of the past while 
mine is a reality and still growing.' 

'Fine, fine. Let's get to business.' 

'Finally' Codringher nodded, petting the cat which purred loudly 'But let us start with the matters 
that are the highest in the hierarchy of importance. First thing: my fee, dear colleague, is two hundred 
and fifty Novigrad crowns. Do you possess that amount? Or could this be that you rank yourself 
among the troubled poor men?' 

'Before, I'd like to check whether you deserve such a fee.' 

'Checking' said the advocate coldly 'is something that you should be doing to your own pockets 
and doing it very quickly. And once you're done, put the money on the table. Then we shall go on to 
other, less important matters.' 

Geralt untied the pouch at his belt and threw it onto the table. The cat abruptly jumped down from 
its master's knees and ran from the room. The advocate put the pouch inside a drawer, without 
checking its contents. 

'You shooed off my cat' he said with authentic displeasure. 

'Sorry. I was under the impression that the clink of coins is the last thing which could scare your 
cat. Tell me what you found out.' 

'That Rience' started Codringher 'whom you're so interested in, is a rather mysterious person. I 
only know that he studied for two years in the Ban Ard school of wizardry. He was expelled after 
being caught committing petty thefts. As usual, in front of the school waited Kaedwenian intelligence 
agents looking for potential recruits. Rience let himself be recruited. I didn't manage to find out what 
he had been doing for the Keadwenian Intelligence. But the wizarding school rejects are usually 
schooled to be murderers. Satisfied?' 

'Very much so. Tell me more.' 

'Second piece of information comes from Cintra. Master Rience spent some time in the dungeons 
there. During Calanthe's reign.' 

'What for?' 

'For unpaid debts. He hadn't been there for long because someone paid them off along with the 
interest. The transaction took place through a bank, with the sponsor's full anonymity. I tried to track 
him down but I gave up after the fourth different bank. Whoever bought Rience out was a true 
professional. And really needed that anonymity.' 


Codringher coughed heavily, raising a handkerchief to his mouth. 

'And then, suddenly, right after the end of the war Master Rience showed himself in Sodden, 
Angren and Brugge' he continued 'Changed beyond recognition, at least in his behaviour and the 
amount of cash he threw around. The cheeky son of a bitch didn't bother making up a new name – he 
still called himself Rience. And under this name he started an intense search for a certain person, or 
rather a certain child. He visited the Druids from Angren Enclave who were taking care of war 
orphans. The body of one of them was later found in nearby woods, massacred, showing signs of 
torture. Then Rience appeared in Transriver...' 

'I know' Geralt interfered 'I know what he did to the peasant family in Transriver. For two hundred 
and fifty crowns I expected more. For now, the only new information to me was the one about 
wizarding school and Kaedwenian Intelligence. I know of the rest. I know that Rience is a heartless 
murderer. I know that he's an arrogant thug who doesn't bother using an alias. I know that he's 
working on somebody's orders. But whose, Codringher?' 

'Some wizard, no doubt. It had to be a wizard that bought him out of the dungeon. You told me 
yourself, and Dandelion confirmed, that Rience is using magic. Real magic, not tricks known to 
expelled students. In that case someone has to be helping him, equipping him with amulets, probably 
also teaching him in secret. Some of the officially practicing magicians keep such secret students and 
factotums who are used for dirty and illegal jobs. In the wizard jargon it's called working on 
somebody's leash.' 

'if he were working on a magic leash, Rience would use camouflaging spells. Yet he changed 
neither his name nor appearance. He didn't even get rid of the burn on his face, given to him by 
Yennefer.' 

'This only confirms that he's working on a leash' Codringher coughed 'Magic camouflage is no 
camouflage, only amateurs use something like that. Had Rience been hiding under an illusion he 
would've been immediately noticed by every magical alarm in town. Wizards can spot illusions 
perfectly. Even in the biggest crowd Rience would catch attention of a wizard as if he had flames 
coming out of his ears and smoke out of his rear end. I'll repeat: Rience is working for a magician and 
he's working in such a way so as not to bring on himself attention from other magicians.' 

'Some believe him to be a spy for Nilfgaard.' 

'I am aware of that. Such is the opinion of Dijkstra, the head of Redanian Intelligence. Dijkstra is 
rarely wrong, so we can assume that he's right about this particular case as well... But one does not 
exclude the other. Factotum of a wizard can be at the same time a spy for Nilfgaard.' 

'In other words some officially practicing wizard is spying for Nilfgaard through his secret 
factotum.' 

'Rubbish' Codringher coughed and looked carefully at the handkerchief 'A wizard would be spying 
for Nilfgaard? What for? For money? Ridiculous. Hoping for some great power under the rule of 
emperor Emhyr? Even more ridiculous. It's not a secret that Emhyr van Emreis keeps his magicians 
on a short leash. The wizards in Nilfgaard are treated with same respect as, let's say, stable boys. And 
they have just as much influence as stable boys. Would any of our arrogant magicians decide to work 
for an emperor to whom he's nothing but a stable boy? Philippa Eilhart who dictates the content of 
royal proclamations and edicts to Vizimir of Redania? Sabrina Glevissig who interrupts speeches by 
Henselt of Keadwen with a smash of a fist on the table and a demand that he shuts up and listens? 
Vilgefortz of Roggeveen who had recently told king Demavend of Aedirn that he had no time for him 
at the moment?' 

'What about Rience then?' 

'Nothing special. Nilfgaardian Intelligence wants to get close to the wizard by recruiting his 
factotum. Rience wouldn't mind betraying his master for a handful of Nilfgaardian florins.' 

'Now you're the one talking rubbish. Even our arrogant magicians would realize immediately that 
they were betrayed and Rience would go to the gallows. If he were lucky.' 

'You're such a child, Geralt. Uncovered spies are not hanged but used. Fed lies and turned into 
double agents.' 


'Don't tease the child, Codringher. I'm not interested in politics or the work of Intelligences. 
Rience is bothering me and I want to know why and on whose orders. The orders seem to be coming 
from a wizard. Which one?' 

'I don't know it yet. But soon I will.' 

'Soon,' uttered the witcher 'Will not be soon enough for me.' 

'I suspected as much' said Codringher 'You sure got yourself in some serious trouble, Geralt. It's a 
stroke of luck that you turned to me, I know how to pull people out of trouble. In fact, I pulled you out 
of it already.' 

'Is this so?' 

'Indeed, it is so' the advocate brought the handkerchief to his mouth and coughed 'You see, 
colleague, other than Nilfgaard and the wizard, there is also a third party in the game. Not long ago I 
was visited by king Foltest's secret agents. They had a problem. The king ordered them to search for a 
certain lost princess. The job turned out to be more difficult than previously thought so the agents 
decided to seek help form a specialist for difficult jobs... While describing the problem, they 
suggested to the specialist that a certain witcher might know a lot about the missing princess. He may 
even know where she currently resides.' 

'What did the specialist do?' 

'Initially, he showed his greatest surprise. He was surprised that the aforementioned witcher had 
not been taken to the dungeons where traditional methods of questioning could be used in order to 
convince him to say everything he knows and even some things which he doesn't know but will 
gladly make up in order to satisfy the interrogators. The agents answered that their king had forbidden 
them from doing so. Witchers, they explained, have such delicate nervous systems that under torture a 
vein bursts inside their brain causing instant death. Instead, they were ordered to follow the witcher, 
but this, too, turned out to be difficult. The specialist praised their common sense and asked them to 
return in two weeks time.' 

'Did they?' 

'Of course they did. And then, the specialist who already considered you his client showed them 
indisputable proof that witcher Geralt doesn't have, never had, and couldn't have had anything to do 
with the missing princess. For the specialist had found eyewitnesses for the death of princess Cirilla, 
daughter of Pavetta and granddaughter of Queen Calanthe. Apparently, Cirilla died of diphtheria three 
years ago in the refugee camp in Angren. The child suffered terribly before her death. Believe it or 
not, Temerian agents had tears in their eyes when they heard the testimonies of my eyewitnesses.' 

'I have tears in my eyes as well. I gather, Temerian agents couldn't or didn't want to offer you 
more than two hundred and fifty crowns?' 

'Your sarcasm breaks my heart, witcher. I have pulled you out of trouble and instead of thanking 
me, you're breaking my heart.' 

'Thank you and forgive me. Why did king Foltest order his men to look for Ciri, Codringher? What 
were they supposed to do after they'd found her?' 

'How naïve. Kill her, of course. She has claims to the throne of Cintra and there are other plans 
towards this throne.' 

'Codringher, this makes no sense. The throne of Cintra was burned down along with the royal 
castle, the city and the whole country. Nilfgaard is in power over there now. Foltest knows it well, so 
do other kings. What claims could Ciri have towards a throne which no longer exists?' 

'Come' Codringher stood up 'Let us find the answer to this question together. I will give you a 
proof of my trust... What is so interesting about this painting?' 

'That it has more holes than a fishing net' said Geralt looking at a portrait in golden frames hanging 
on the wall opposite of advocate's desk 'And that it shows some unbelievable moron.' 

'My late father' Codringher grimaced 'An unbelievable moron, indeed. I hanged him in here as a 
sort of warning to myself. Let's go, witcher' 

They entered the anteroom. At the sight of the witcher, the cat, which was laying in the middle of 
the carpet and licking its paw, escaped through the dark corridor. 

'Why do cats hate you so, Geralt? Is it because...' 

'Yes. It is.' 


Behind one of the mahogany panels was a secret entrance. Codringher walked in first. The panel, 
no doubt magically activated, closed behind them. There was a light on the other side of the secret 
corridor. The room there was cold and the dry air was heavy from the smell of candles and dust. 

'Meet my partner, Geralt.' 

'Fenn?' smiled the witcher. 'Impossible.' 

'Possible. Admit it, you thought Fenn wasn't real?' 

'Not at all.' 

A screeching sound could be heard from between the bookshelves and soon after that a curious 
vehicle emerged. It was an armchair with wheels. On it sat a midget with a big head placed on 
disproportionately thin shoulders. The midget had no legs. 

'Let me introduce you,' said Codringher. 'Jacob Fenn, a talented legist, my partner and invaluable 
co-worker. And this is our guest and client...' 

'Witcher Geralt of Rivia,' finished the cripple with a smile. 'I figured it out. After all, I've been 
working on our contract for quite some time now. Follow me, gentlemen.' 

They walked behind the screeching armchair into a labyrinth of bookshelves, the size of which 
could put the Oxenfurt University Library to shame. The incunabula, guessed Geralt, must have been 
collected by whole generations of Codringhers and Fenns. He was glad for the trust he was given and 
for the possibility of meeting Fenn. He knew, however, that despite being a real living person Fenn 
was also mythical, if only in part. The mythical Fenn, Codringher's infallible alter-ego was often 
reported to have been spotted in town, whereas the talented legist had probably never left either the 
building or the armchair. 

The middle of the room was especially well-lit. There was a low, easy to access desktop, which 
was piled up with books, scrolls of parchment and vellum, paper, ink bottles, bundles of feathers, and 
thousands of mysterious utensils. Not all were so mysterious though. Geralt recognized forms for 
counterfeit stamps and a diamond grater used to remove the records from official documents. In the 
middle of the desktop lay a small arbalest repeater ball and next to it, from under a velvet fabric, sat a 
large magnifying glass made of polished crystal. Such glass was a rarity and cost a fortune. 

'Found anything new, Fenn?' 

'Not much,' the cripple smiled. The smile was warm and pleasant. 'I have narrowed the list of 
Rience's potential employers to twenty eight wizards...' 

'Let's leave that for a second,' interrupted Codringher. 'We're interested in something else at the 
moment. Please explain to Geralt all of the reasons why the missing Princess Ciri is an object of wide 
search by the agents of the Four Kingdoms.' 

'In the girl's veins runs the blood of Queen Calanthe,' said Fenn in a voice expressing surprise at 
having needed to explain such simple facts. 'She is the last descendant of the royal line. Cintra has a 
significant strategic and political value. Lost, somewhere far from the sphere of influence, a successor 
to the throne is a bother, it not a danger when in a sphere of the wrong influence. Like a Nilfgaardian 
sphere of influence, for example.' 

'As I recall,' said Geralt. 'The Cintran law of succession excludes women.' 

'True,' confirmed Fenn and smiled again. 'But a woman can always become somebody's wife and 
the mother of a male descendant. The Intelligence agencies of the Four Kingdoms found out about the 
frantic search for the princess started by Rience and assumed that this was the reason. It was then 
decided to prevent the princess from becoming somebody's wife and mother. In the simplest and most 
reliable way. 

'But the princess is dead,' added Codringher quickly, seeing the change in Geralt's face caused by 
midget's words. 'The agents learned it and called off the search.' 

'They have for now,' the witcher made an effort to sound cool and collected. 'One of the aspects of 
a lie is that it never works for long. Besides, the royal agents are only one of the players in this game. 
The agents, as you yourselves said, were hunting for Ciri in order to thwart the plans of other hunters. 
Those other ones might be much less susceptible to disinformation. I have hired you so that you 
would find a way of ensuring the child's safety. What are your propositions?' 


'We have a certain idea,' Fenn shot a look at his partner but didn't find an order of silence. 'We 
want to spread, discreetly but widely, a notion that not only Princess Cirilla, but also her potential 
male descendants, have no right to the throne of Cintra.' 

'In Cintra the distaff side doesn't take part in the succession,' explained Codringher struggling with 
a new coughing attack. 'Only the spear does.' 

'Exactly,' nodded the legist. 'Geralt said so himself. It's an old law, even that she-devil Calanthe 
failed to invalidate it, despite the attempts.' 

'She tried to override it using an intrigue,' said Codringher. 'An unlawful kind of an intrigue. Tell 
him, Fenn.' 

'Celanthe was the only daughter of King Dagorad and Queen Adalia. After their deaths, she had 
defied the nobility, which saw in her solely a wife for the new king. She wanted to rule alone. She did 
agree for a Prince Consort, just to ensure continuity of the dynasty, but his position and authority 
would be comparable to that of a ragdoll. The old aristocratic families opposed fervently. Calanthe's 
alternatives were a civil war, an abdication, or a marriage with Roegner, the prince of Ebbing. She 
chose the third option. She still maintained authority over the country, but together with Roegner. 
Naturally, she never let herself be subjugated or relegated to the womanly sidelines. She was the 
Lioness of Cintra. But formally Roegner was the ruler, although nobody would title him a Lion.' 

'And Calanthe,' added Codringher, 'struggled fiercely to become pregnant with a son. In vain. She 
gave birth to a daughter, Pavetta, then miscarried twice and it became clear that she wouldn't have any 
more children. All her plans went down the drain. Women's lot. Great ambitions spoiled by a ruined 
uterus.' 

Geralt winced. 

'You're disgustingly trivial, Codringher.' 

'I know. The truth can be trivial too. Because soon Roegner started to look for a young princess 
with appropriately wide hips, preferably from a family with fertility practically figuring on their 
pedigree chart. And Calanthe found herself in deep trouble. Every meal, every cup of wine could have 
brought her death, every hunting expedition could have ended with an unfortunate accident. It is 
therefore no wonder that the Lioness of Cintra decided to take the initiative. Roegner died. The 
country was at the time plagued with a pox, so his death raised no suspicions.' 

'I think I'm beginning to understand,' said the witcher, seemingly impassive. 'The news you are 
going to spread discreetly but widely around the world, that is. Ciri will become known as the 
granddaughter of a schemer and a murderer?' 

'Don't be too hasty, Geralt. Go on, Fenn.' 

'Calanthe,' smiled the midget. 'May have kept her life, but not the crown, which was slipping 
further and further away. When, after Roegner's death, the Lioness took full power, the nobility again 
opposed violations of the law and tradition. The throne of Cintra was reserved for a king, not a queen. 
It had therefore been decided: the moment little Pavetta started resembling a woman in the least bit; 
she would be married to somebody who would become the new king. An infertile queen's remarriage 
was out of the question. The Lioness of Cintra understood that her best hopes would be to become a 
Queen Mother. What's worse, Pavetta's husband could be someone who would completely remove 
his mother-in-law from power.' 

'Allow me to be trivial again,' said Codringher. 'Calanthe did everything in her power to postpone 
Pavetta's marriage. She cancelled the first plans when the girl was ten years old and again, when she 
was thirteen. The nobility saw through her scheme and demanded Pavetta's fifteenth birthday to be 
her last birthday as a maiden. Calanthe was forced to comply. But before that happened, she had 
achieved what she had hoped for. Pavetta stayed a virgin for too long. She got so horny that she 
eventually got laid by a random stranger, who also happened to have been turned into a monster. 
There were some additional supernatural circumstances, some prophecies, spells, promises... The so-
called Law of Surprise? Right, Geralt? You probably remember what happened next. Calanthe 
summoned a witcher to Cintra, and that witcher caused a big turmoil. Unaware that he was being used, 
he removed the curse from the monstrous Hedgehog, enabling him to marry Pavetta. By doing so, the 
witcher had given Calanthe easier access to the throne. Pavetta's relationship with the uncharmed 
monster was, to the nobles, such a huge shock that they accepted the sudden marriage of the Lioness 
and Eist Tuirseach. The Earl of Skellige Islands was, to them, a much better party than some 
vagabond Hedgehog. In this way, Calanthe could still rule over the country. Eist, like all Islanders, 
had too much respect for the Lioness of Cintra to oppose her in anything, and the kingship simply 
bored him anyway. And so he handed her the full power. And Calanthe, stuffing herself with elixirs 
and medicaments, dragged her husband to the bedroom day and night. She wanted to rule till the end 
of her days. And if she had to rule as a Queen Mother, then only to her own son. But, like I said, great 
ambitions...' 

'Like you said. No need to repeat yourself.' 

'As for Princess Pavetta, the wife of that strange Hedgehog, already during the marriage ceremony 
she was wearing a suspiciously loose dress. The disheartened Calanthe changed her plans. If not her 
own son, she decided, then at least Pavetta's. But Pavetta gave birth to a daughter. A curse or what? 
However, the princess could always have more children. Or rather could have had. Because then a 
curious accident had taken place. Both her and the Hedgehog died in an unexplainable catastrophe.' 

'What are you implying, Codringher?' 

'I'm trying to explain the situation, nothing more. After Pavetta's death Calanthe fell apart, but not 
for long. Her granddaughter was her last hope: Pavetta's daughter, Cirilla. Wayward little Ciri, 
running wild around the castle. Apple of the eye for some, especially elders, since she resembled 
Calanthe from her younger days so much. For the others... a freak, the daughter of a monster, 
promised to some witcher. And here's the thing: Calanthe's golden girl, evidently being groomed as 
her successor, was treated almost as if she was her next incarnation; the Lion Cub of the Lionesses 
blood, was already back then considered by some to be excluded from succession. Cirilla was a child 
of a low birth. Pavetta had committed a mésalliance. She had mixed the blue royal blood with the 
common blood of a vagabond of unknown origin.' 

'Quite cunning, Codringher. But it won't pass. Ciri's father was not a commoner at all. He was a 
prince.' 

'Really? I wasn't aware. From which kingdom?' 

'Somewhere on the south... from Maecht... Yes, definitely Maecht.' 

'Interesting,' murmured Codringher. 'Maecht has been a Nilfgaardian march for a long time now. 
It's part of the Metinna Province.' 

'But it is a kingdom,' objected Fenn. 'The ruler there is a king.' 

'The ruler there is Emhyr van Emreis,' retorted Codringher. 'Whoever is the king there, it's due to 
Emhyr's grace. But since we're at it, go check who Emhyr did put on the throne over there. I can't 
remember.' 

'Right away.' The cripple pushed the wheels of the armchair and moved with a screech in the 
direction of one of the bookshelves. Once there, he picked up a thick roll of scrolls and began to view 
them, throwing the unimportant ones on the floor. 'Hmmm... got it. Maecht Kingdom. Coat of Arms: 
silver fish and crowns on the blue-red field...' 

'Screw heraldry, Fenn. Who is the king?' 

'Hoet the Righteous. Chosen through an election...' 

'...by Emhyr of Nilfgaard,' finished Codringher coldly. 

'...nine years ago.' 

'Not this one.' The advocate countered quickly. 'This one is of no interest to us. Who was there 
before him?' 

'Give me a second. Here. Akerspaark. Died...' 

'Died of acute pneumonia induced by daggers belonging to Emhyr's stooges, or to that Righteous 
Fellow,' Codringher once again showed his perspicacity. 'Geralt, does the name Akerspaark ring a 
bell? Could this possibly be the daddy of our Hedgehog?' 

'Yes,' nodded Geralt. 'Akerspaark. I remember Duny mentioning that name.' 

'Duny?' 

'That was his name. He was a prince, son of this Akerspaark...' 

'No,' interrupted Fenn, gazing into the scrolls. 'Here's a list of his children. Legitimate sons: Orm, 
Gorm, Torm, Horm and Gonzalez. Legitimate Daughters: Alia, Valia, Nina, Pauli¬na, Mamna and 
Argentina...' 


'I take back my vicious accusations towards Nilfgaard and Righteous Hoet,' said Codringher with 
all seriousness. 'That Akerspaark wasn't assassinated. He was simply screwed to death. Because I 
assume that he also had bastard children, right Fenn?' 

'He did. Quite a lot. But none with the name Duny.' 

'And I don't expect to see him there. Geralt, your Hedgehog was no prince. Even if he was sired 
somewhere in the dark by this boor Akerspaark, he's separated from the title not only by Nilfgaard, 
but also by the long line of legitimate Orms, Gorms or some other Gonzalezes with their own, 
probably quite numerous, progeny. So formally, Pavetta did commit a mésalliance.' 

'And Ciri, being the product of this mésalliance, has no right to the throne?' 

'Exactly.' 

Fenn screeched his way back to the desktop. 

'It's a good argument,' he said, tilting his big head. 'But only one argument. Keep in mind, Geralt, 
that we're not fighting over the crown. The rumours are supposed to make it clear that the girl cannot 
be used as a means of taking over Cintra. And that such an attempt could easily be challenged. The 
girl would stop being a figure in the political game; she would be just an unimportant pawn. 
Therefore...' 

'She would be allowed to live,' finished Codringher dispassionately. 

'From the formal point of view,' asked Geralt, 'how solid is that argument of yours?' 

Fenn looked at Coringher and then at the witcher. 

'Not very solid,' he admitted. 'Cirilla is still of Calanthe's blood, even if a bit diluted. In normal 
circumstances she would have probably ended up tossed aside from the throne but the current 
circumstances can't be described as normal. Lionesses blood has a political meaning...' 

'Blood...' Geralt rubbed his forehead. 'Codringher, what is the meaning of the phrase 'Child of 
Elder Blood'? 

'Why do you ask? Did someone use it when speaking about Ciri?' 

'Yes.' 

'Who had?' 

'Never mind. What does it mean?' 

'Luned aep Hen Ichaer,' mumbled Fenn suddenly, moving away from the desktop. 'Literally not a 
'Child' but a 'Daughter' of the Elder Blood. Hmm... Elder Blood... I've encountered this phrase 
before. I can't recall where... I think it has something to do with elven prophecies. In some of the 
older versions of Ithlinne's prophecy texts there are, I believe, mentions of the Elder Blood of Elves, 
or Aen Hen Ichaer. But we don't have the full text here; we would have to ask the elves...' 

'Let's just leave it,' cut Codringher coldly. 'Too many matters solved at the same time, too many 
magpies caught by their tails, too many prophecies and secrets. That's enough for now. Thank you 
and goodbye. Let's go, Geralt. We shall return to the guestroom.' 

'Not enough, eh?' inquired the witcher the moment they settled themselves in the armchairs. 'The 
fee is too low?' 

Codringher picked up a metal star-shaped object from the top of the desk and spun it around his 
fingers. 

'Too low, Geralt. Digging in elven prophecies is a huge burden, loss of time and resources. The 
need of searching for a contact with the elves because nobody else can comprehend their language in 
all its entirety. Elven manuscripts are usually filled with twisted symbolism, acrostics, sometimes 
even codes. The Elder Speech always has at least a double meaning and when written it can have 
dozens of meanings. Elves have never been happy to help anyone trying to crack their prophecies. 
And in these times, when there's a bloody war with the Squirrels in the forests and pogroms in the 
cities, it's not safe to approach them. It's a double risk. Elves can take you for a provocateur, humans 
can accuse you of treason...' 

'How much, Codringher?' 

The advocate was silent for a while, constantly playing with the metal star. 

'Ten percent,' he said finally. 

'Ten percent of what?' 


'Don't insult me, witcher. It's a serious matter. I'm less and less sure of what is going on and 
whenever something isn't certain then everything is certainly about money. Therefore I'm more 
content on percentages than fees. You will give me ten percent of whatever you are going to get 
yourself, discounting the sum already paid. Do we have a deal?' 

'No. I don't want you to end with losses. Ten percent of nothing equals nothing, Codringher. I, dear 
colleague, will get nothing out of this.' 

'Don't insult me, I said. I don't believe that you are not doing this for cash. I don't believe that 
behind it there's no...' 

'I don't give a damn about your beliefs. There will be no deal. And no percentages. Make up your 
mind about the price for the information.' 

'Had it been anybody else,' Codringher coughed. 'I would have thrown them out the doors, 
convinced that they're trying to deceive me. But such a noble and naive generosity fits an 
anachronistic witcher like you perfectly. This is so like you, beautifully and pathetically old-
fashioned... getting yourself killed for nothing...' 

'Stop wasting time. How much, Codringher?' 

'Double the amount. Five hundred in total.' 

'I regret,' Geralt shook his head, 'That I'm unable to afford such a sum. Not at the moment, at 
least.' 

'In that case, I renew my proposition from when we first met,' said the advocate slowly, still 
fiddling with the star. 'Work for me and you will be able to afford everything. Information and other 
luxuries.' 

'No, Codringher.' 

'Why not?' 

'You won't be able to understand.' 

'This time you're hurting not my heart, but rather my pride. Because I pride myself in always 
understating everything. The backbone and foundation of our professions lies in wickedness, yet you 
still prefer the anachronistic one to the modern one. 

The witcher smiled. 

'Exactly.' 

Codringher started coughing again, wiped his lips and then opened his yellowish-green eyes. 

'Have you taken a peek at the list of magicians which lay on the desktop? The one with Rience's 
potential employers?' 

'Yes, I have.' 

'I won't give it to you until I check it carefully. Don't put too much trust in what you have read. 
Dandelion told me that Phillippa Eilhart probably knows who's backing Rience but she refused to 
share her knowledge with you. Phillippa wouldn't bother protecting just any sucker. There must be 
some important person behind all this.' 

The witcher was silent. 

'Watch your step, Geralt. You're in great danger. Someone is playing a game with you. Someone is 
watching your every move, maybe even directing them. Don't let arrogance and confidence take hold 
of you. The one who's toying with you isn't a striga or a werewolf. It's not the Michelet brothers. Not 
even Rience. The Child of Elder blood, my ass. As if it wasn't enough with the throne, wizards, kings 
and Nilfgaard, now we also have the elves. Stop this game, witcher, leave it. Ruin their plans by doing 
something they won't expect. Break up this insane relationship; don't let anyone associate you with 
Cirilla. Leave her to Yennefer, go back to Kaer Morhen and don't show yourself outside. Hide in the 
mountains while I peruse the elven manuscripts, slowly, carefully, with no rush. And once I gain the 
information about the Elder Blood and the wizard, you will gain enough money and we will make the 
deal.' 

'I can't wait. The girl is in danger.' 

'True. But I also know that you are believed to be an obstacle on the way to her. An obstacle that 
must be neutralized. As a result, you are the one in danger. They get to the girl only after eliminating 
you.' 


'Or after I stop the game and retreat to Kaer Morhen. I paid you too much, Codringher, for advice 
like this.' 

The advocate turned the iron star around his fingers. 

'For the amount which you paid me today. I've been working actively for quite some time, 
witcher,' he said, coughing. 'The advice I gave you is well-thought out. Hide in Kaer Morhen; 
disappear. And then, those who are looking for Ciri shall get her.' 

Geralt's eyes narrowed and he smiled. Codringher didn't pale. 

'I know what I'm talking about,' he added looking him straight in the eyes. 'Ciri's adversaries will 
find her and do with her whatever they want. While both you and her will be safe.' 

'Explain, please. But quick.' 

'I found a certain girl. A war orphan from a Cintran noble family. She's been through the refugee 
camps and is currently measuring and cutting fabrics in Brugge, having been taken in by a clothier. 
Seemingly nothing about her stands out. Except one thing. She quite resembles a person from a 
portrait of the Lion Cub of Cintra... Would you like to see her picture?' 

'No, Codringher. I don't wish to. And I won't agree to this sort of thing.' 

'Geralt.' The advocate closed his eyes. 'Tell me, what exactly leads you to such decisions? If you 
want to save your Ciri... then you can't afford the luxury of contempt. No, sorry. You can't afford 
holding contempt in contempt. The times of contempt are approaching, colleague, the times of 
terrible, boundless contempt. You must fit in. My proposition is simple. Someone will die, so that 
someone else can live. A person you love will survive. Some other girl will die, a girl you don't even 
know, someone whom you've never seen, someone whom...' 

'Whom I can hold in contempt?' interrupted the witcher. 'Am I supposed to pay for what I love 
with contempt for myself? No, Codringher. Leave that other child alone, let her continue measuring 
fabric. Destroy her picture. Burn it. And for my two hundred and fifty crowns, which you have put 
inside your drawer, give me something else. Information. Yennefer and Ciri have left Ellander. I'm 
sure that you know about it. I'm sure that you know where they're going. I'm sure that you know if 
someone is following them.' 

Codringher tapped his fingers on the desk and coughed. 

'The Wolf, unmoved by the warnings, still wants to hunt,' he said. 'He cannot see that he is the 
prey, that he's running straight into a trap set by the real hunter.' 

'Don't be so banal. Be consistent.' 

'As you wish. It's not hard to figure that Yennefer is going on the convent of Wizards, which will 
take place on the Thanedd Island in Garstang at the beginning of July. She's moving slyly, doesn't use 
magic, so it's hard to trace her. She was still in Ellander a week ago, so I presume that it will take her 
three, four more days to reach the city Gors Velen, just a stone throw away from Thanedd. On the way 
of Gors Velen she will have to go through Anchor village. If you set out now you will be able to take 
out those who are following her. Because, indeed, she is being followed.' 

'I hope,' Geralt smiled nastily. 'That those aren't royal agents?' 

'No,' said the advocate, looking at the iron star. 'These are not agents. But it's also not Rience, 
who's smarter than you because he stopped showing himself in public after the ordeal with the 
Miechelet brothers. Yennefer is followed by three paid mercenaries.' 

'I presume that you know who they are?' 

'I know everybody. Which is why my advice is as follows: don't bother them. Don't go to Anchor. 
I will make use of my links and connections. I will try to bribe the thugs and reverse the contract. In 
other words, I will send them after Rience. If it works...' 

He stopped suddenly and threw the iron star. The weapon howled through the air and pierced the 
portrait right in the middle of Senior Codringher's forehead. 

'Nice, isn't it?' the advocate smiled broadly. 'It's called an orion. An invention from overseas. I've 
been practicing for over a month and scoring almost every time. Could be useful. In the range of thirty 
meters such a star is deadly and in addition to that it can be easily hidden in a glove or hat. 
Nilfgaardian Special Forces have been using them since last year. Ha, ha, if Rience is indeed spying 
for Nilgaard it would be ironic if he were found with an orion in the skull... Don't you think?' 


'I don't. You're the one supposed to be doing the thinking. You're the one with two hundred and 
fifty crowns in your drawer.' 

'Sure,' Codringher nodded. 'I assume that you are giving me a free rein in this aspect. Let us 
commemorate Rience's impending death with a minute of silence. Why the scowl, dammit? Have you 
no respect for death?' 

'Too much to stand still when idiots are jeering at it. Have you ever pondered your own death, 
Codringher?' 

The advocate coughed again and stared at the handkerchief. 

'I have,' he said quietly. 'A lot. But that is none of your business, witcher. Are you going to 
Anchor?' 

'Yes, I am.' 

'Ralf Blunden, known as 'Professor'. Heimo Kantor. 'Short' Yaxa. Do any of those names ring a 
bell?' 

'No, they don't.' 

'They're all good with swords. Better than the Michelets. I advise a better weapon. Like the 
Nilfgaardian stars. I could sell you a few. I have lots of them.' 

'I'm not interested. They're impractical. Too much noise.' 

'The noise works in the psychological way. It can paralyse the victim with fear.' 

'It's possible. But it can also alert. I could dodge it.' 

'If you saw the throw, perhaps. I know that you can dodge the spears... but from behind...' 

'From behind as well.' 

'Bullshit.' 

'Let's make a bet,' said Geralt coldly. 'I will turn in the direction of your moronic father and you 
will throw the orion at me. If you hit me, then you win. If you don't, then you lose. If you lose, you 
will decrypt the elven manuscripts. You will get information about the Child of Elder Blood. Fast. 
And on credit.' 

'What if I win?' 

'You will do it anyway and pass the results to Yennefer. She will pay. It's a win-win situation for 
you.' 

Codringher opened the drawer and brought out a second orion. 

'You're hoping that I won't accept the challenge.' It was a statement, not a question. 

'No,' smiled the witcher. 'I'm sure that you will.' 

'You're quite a dare-devil. Did you forget? I have no conscience.' 

'I didn't forget. After all, the times of contempt are approaching and you are always going with the 
times. But I have remembered your remarks about my anachronistic naiveté and so this time I'm 
taking a risk with no hopes for a profit. How's that?' 

'Very well then.' Codringher picked up the iron star and stood. 'My curiosity has always been 
stronger than reason and mercy. Turn around.' 

The witcher complied. He looked at the portrait and then closed his eyes. 

The star howled and pierced the wall four inches from the frame. 

'Holy shit!' yelled Codringher. 'Son of a whore, you didn't even flinch!' 

Geralt turned around and smiled. In a very nasty way. 

'Why should I have flinched? I could hear that you aimed so as not to hit.' 

 

*** 

 

The inn was deserted. On a bench, in a corner, sat a young woman with circles under her eyes. 
Turned modestly to one side, she nursed an infant. A man -- possibly her husband -- dozed next to her, 
his broad shoulders resting against the wall. In the shadows, behind the stove, sat another person 
which Aplegatt could not quite distinguish. 

 The innkeeper raised his head, saw Aplegatt and, upon noticing his uniform and the Aedirn coat of 
arms on his chest, frowned momentarily. Aplegatt was used to this kind of welcome. He was a royal 
messenger, and as such had the unquestioned right to a fresh mount. The royal decrees were explicit: 


in every town, village, inn and county, messengers had the right to a fresh horse, and woe betide those 
who failed to comply. Messengers, of course, left their own mount behind and issued a receipt for the 
new one which the innkeeper could present to the local mayor for compensation. But things could go 
rather differently. As well, messengers were always viewed with fear and suspicion: will he, won't he? 
Will he take our Precious to her doom? our little Sparrow, barely weaned? or our beloved Little 
Crow? Aplegatt had seen it before, children sobbing as their favourite horse was saddled and lead 
from the stable, clinging to their playmate; more than once he saw the faces of adults pale at the 
injustice, at their helplessness. 

 'I don't need a fresh horse' he said brusquely. (He had the impression that the innkeeper breathed a 
sigh of relief.) 'I just need to eat, because the road really did me in. Got something in that pot of 
yours?' 

 

'There's a bit of soup left, I'll bring it right away, have a seat. Will you be staying with us tonight? 
It's already getting dark.' 

 Aplegatt thought for a moment. Two days earlier he had met Hansom, a messenger he knew, and as 
per the usual orders, they exchanged missions. Hansom was carrying letters and a message for king 
Demavend, and he took off at great speed through Temeria and Mahakam, towards Vengerberg. As 
for Aplegatt, having taken the mail for king Vizimir of Redania, he continued towards Oxenfurt and 
Tretogor. He still had more than three hundred miles to cover. 

 'I'll eat and then I'll be on my way', he decided. 'It's a full moon, and the road is clear enough'. 

 'Your choice'. 

The soup he was served was thin and had little flavour, but the messenger didn't notice such details. 
At home, he savoured his wife's cooking; at work, he ate what he was given. He ingested his meagre 
meal slowly, holding his spoon rather awkwardly with fingers still stiff from holding the reins. 

A cat who had been dozing on the bench near the stove raised its head suddenly and hissed. 

'King's messenger?' 

Aplegatt shuddered. The question came from the man who had only a moment before been sitting 
in shadow; now suddenly close to the messenger. His hair was white as milk, plastered to his forehead 
by a leather headband, and we wore a black jacket covered in silver studs, as well as heavy boots. 
Above his right shoulder shone the pommel of his sword which he wore across his back. 

'Where does your road take you?' 

'Wherever the royal will takes me', replied Aplegatt coldly. 

He never answered such questions any differently. 

The man with the white hair was quiet for a while; watching the messenger intently. His face was 
abnormally pale with strangely dark eyes. 

'The royal will', he said finally, his voice unpleasant, a bit hoarse, 'probably orders you to make 
haste. You are no doubt anxious to be on your way.' 

'And how does that concern you? Who are you to rush me?' 

'I'm nobody', said the man with the white hair with a horrible smile. 'And I'm not rushing you. But 
if I were you, I'd get out of here as quickly as possible. I wouldn't want anything to happen to you.' 

For such statements, Aplegatt had another well worn reply. Short and sweet. Calm and composed, 
but leaving no doubt by whom a royal messenger was employed and the punishment which met 
anyone daring to touch even a single hair on his head. But something in the man with the white hair's 
voice convinced Aplegatt not to use that reply. 

'I've got to let my horse rest a bit, sir. An hour, maybe two.' 

'I understand'. The man with the white hair nodded, then turned his head as if to listen to 
something outside. Aplegatt listened too, but all he could hear were the crickets. 'Rest then', said the 
man with the white hair as he adjusted the belt of his scabbard which crossed his chest. 'But don't go 
out into the yard. No matter what happens, don't go outside.' 

Aplegatt refrained from asking any questions. He knew instinctively that it was best not to. He 
leaned over his bowl and continued fishing for the few pieces of ham floating on the surface of his 
soup. When he looked up again, the man with the white hair was gone. 

A moment later, there was the neighing of a horse and the hammering of horseshoes in the yard. 


Three men entered the inn. When he saw them, the innkeeper began feverishly wiping his tankard. 
The woman with the nursling moved closer to her husband who was dozing and woke him with a jab 
of her elbow. Discretely, Aplegatt moved the stool where he had set his belt and knife closer to him. 

As they approached the counter, the men looked over their hosts and sized them up. They walked 
slowly causing their spurs and weapons to jingle. 

'Welcome, gentlemen'. The innkeeper cleared his throat and spoke. 'What can I get you?' 

'Hooch', said one of the men, short and squat, with long arms like a monkey. He wore two crossed 
Zerrikanian sabres on his back. 'Want some, Professor?' 

'Gladly', acquiesced the second man as he adjusted his spectacles -- made of polished crystal, with 
bluish reflections and gold frames -- which were planted on his hooked nose. 'As long as the alcohol 
is unadulterated.' 

The innkeeper served them. Aplegatt noticed that his hands were trembling slightly. The men stood 
with their backs to the counter; they sipped the contents of their clay mugs unhurriedly. 

'My dear innkeeper', said the man with the glasses suddenly, 'it has come to my attention that two 
ladies passed by this establishment, not very long ago; they were heading with alacrity towards Gors 
Velen.' 

'Lots of people pass through here', stammered the innkeeper. 

'You could not have failed to notice the ladies in question', said the man in the glasses, slowly. 
'One of them has black hair, and is of exceptional beauty. She rides a raven stallion. The second, 
younger, with light hair and green eyes, rides a speckled mare. Did they pass through here?' 

'No.' Aplegatt, who felt a sudden chill up his spine, beat the innkeeper. 'They didn't come through 
here'. 

He remembered the words of the young girl: danger with grey feathers; warm sand... 

'Messenger?' 

Aplegatt nodded. 

'Where did you come from and where are you going?' 

'Wherever the royal will takes me.' 

'The young ladies I mentioned, you wouldn't have met them, by chance?' 

'No.' 

'You're awfully quick to deny it', growled the third man, tall and pole thin. His hair was black and 
shiny, as if it was greased back. 'And I don't get the impression that you searched your memory very 
thoroughly.' 

'Leave it, Heim.' The man with the glasses gestured. 'He's a royal messenger. Not a troublemaker. 
What is the name of this establishment, innkeeper?' 

'Anchor.' 

'And how far to Gors Velen?' 

'What?' 

'How many miles?' 

'Me, I never measured it in miles. But it must be three days travel...' 

'By horse?' 

'By cart.' 

'Hey!' Shorty exclaimed suddenly. He stood and looked out through the mostly open door. 'Have a 
look, Professor. Who's that one? Isn't that...' 

The man with the glasses also looked outside and his face fell at once. 

'Yes', he whistled. 'It's him, positively. We're in luck, it's all falling into place.' 

'We wait for him to come in?' 

'He won't come in. He's seen our horses.' 

'Shut-up, Yaxa. He's saying something.' 

'You have a choice.' (Coming from outside, a voice, slightly hoarse but resonant, which Aplegatt 
recognized immediately, rang out.) 'Either one of you comes out here and tells me who hired you, and 
you leave here without any fuss. Or the three of you come out. I'm waiting.' 

'Bastard...' snarled the man with the black hair. 'He knows. What do we do?' 

Slowly, the man with the glasses put his mug back on the counter. 


'What we were paid to do.' 

He spit into his hand, shook his hands and drew his sword. Immediately, the other two also drew 
their weapons. The innkeeper opened his mouth as if to scream, but quickly closed it again upon 
seeing the cold, piercing look cast by the man in the blue glasses. 

'Everybody sit down, mouths shut', said the man. 'Heim, when the battle starts, try to surprise him 
from behind. We're off, friends, the shits gonna fly! Let's go! 

As soon as they were outside, the fight began: groaning, stamping and the clanging of swords could 
be heard. And then a cry rang out. A cry to make your hair stand on end. 

The innkeeper paled, the woman with the circles under her eyes let a muffled scream as she 
clutched her nursling to her bosom. The cat on the bench stood, arched its back and raised its tail. 
Aplegatt, still seated, slid quickly into a corner. His knife was on his lap, but he had not yet removed it 
from its scabbard. 

Outside, again there was the sound friction on a plank, a whistling and the clanging of blades. 

'You!' shouted someone savagely, and this shout, while followed by a rather salty curse, was 
nonetheless a desperate cry of rage. 'You!' 

The clashing blades whistled through the air. Then suddenly, a very loud piercing noise which 
seemed to tear the air around it rang out. It was as if a huge sack of grain crashed onto the planks. 
From one of the hitching posts, the sound of horseshoes was heard, as well as the neighing of the 
frightened horses. 

Again, something heavy crashed loudly onto the planks, the fast, heavy footsteps of someone 
running echoed in the yard. The woman with the nursling pressed closer to her husband, the innkeeper 
tried to back further into the wall. Aplegatt took out his knife, still keeping his weapon hidden under 
the table. The running man was coming towards the inn; it was clear that at any moment he would be 
at the door. But before he appeared, there was the whistling of a blade. 

The man screamed and, immediately after, he staggered into the common room. He nearly fell on 
the threshold, but managed to stay upright. He took a few steps forward, slowly, wavered and only 
then collapsed in the very centre of the room, sending up a cloud of the accumulated dust between the 
floorboards. He fell face first, hands at his sides, legs bent. His crystal glasses crashed to the floor and 
shattered in a million bluish pieces. A dark, shining puddle began to spread beneath his now immobile 
body. 

No one moved. There wasn't even a scream. 

The man with the white hair entered the room. 

He slipped the sword he held easily into its scabbard on his shoulders. He approached the counter, 
not even bothering to look at the corpse spread on the floor. The innkeeper shrank back. 

'They were bad people', said the man with the white hair hoarsely. 'And now they are dead. When 
the bailiff comes, he might mention a reward for their heads. Let the bailiff do as he pleases with it.' 

The innkeeper nodded fervently. 

'Maybe', continued the man with the white hair after a moment, 'some colleagues or friends of 
these bad people might wonder what happened to them. To them, innkeeper, simply say that the Wolf 
ate them. The White Wolf. And tell them that they should look behind them often as well. One day, 
they'll see the Wolf at their heels.' 

 

*** 

 

It was past midnight when Aplegatt reached the gates of Tretogor, three days later. He was angry 
because he had been forced to loiter by the moat, he had nearly ripped out his throat shouting to wake 
the guards: these guards slept with the angels and were none too quick to open the gate. Aplegatt 
didn't fail to curse them generously, going back at least three generations. Later, he was pleased to 
hear their commander, once wakened, roundly complete the list of insults he had himself muttered 
about the mothers, grandmothers and great-grandmothers of these no-goods. Naturally, there was no 
question of seeing king Vizimir in the middle of the night. Anyway, he had given up the idea. He 
hoped to rest until the morning bells. He was kidding himself. Rather than being shown somewhere to 
rest, he was taken post haste to the guard house. It wasn't the City Guard that awaited him inside, but 


the other one, the big one, the gigantic one. Aplegatt knew him, it was Dijkstra, the king of Redania's 
intelligence man. Dijkstra – the messenger knew – was used to hearing news destined exclusively for 
royal ears. Aplegatt gave him his letters. 

'You have oral messages?' 

'I do, milord.' 

'I'm listening.' 

'From Demavend to Vizimir', Aplegatt recited with his eyes closed. 'First, the Masqueraders are 
ready for the second night after the full moon in July. Second, I will not be gracing the assembly of 
the Crafty on Thanedd Island with my presence, and I advise you to do the same. Third, the Lion Cub 
is dead.' 

Dijkstra winced slightly and drummed his fingers on the table... 

'Here are the letters for king Demavend. And for the oral message... listen carefully and use that 
memory of yours. You will relay it to your king, word for word. To him alone, and no one else. 
Nobody, got it?' 

'Got it, milord.' 

'The information is as follows: 'From Vizimir to Demavend. Contain absolutely the Masqueraders. 
There has been a betrayal. The Flame has gathered an army in Dol Angra and is waiting for any 
excuse.' Repeat.' 

Aplegatt did so. 

'Good.' Dijkstra nodded. 'You will leave at sun up.' 

'I've been on the road five days, milord.' The messenger rubbed his buttocks. 'If I could only sleep 
until at least mid-morning... Would you allow me?' 

'Is your king, Demavend, sleeping right now? And me, I am sleeping? For even asking, boy, I 
should punch you in the face. You'll be fed, and you can stretch your legs a bit on the grass. After 
that, you'll hit the road before sunrise. I've asked that you be given a little thoroughbred stallion. 
You'll see, he runs like a hurricane. And stop moping. There's still this small purse for you, it's a 
bonus, a little extra. So you don't go saying Vizimir is stingy.' 

'Thanks to you, milord.' 

'When you reach the woods along the Pontar, be careful. Squirrels were seen there. Not to mention 
that those countries don't lack for regular bandits.' 

'Oh yes! I'm aware of that, milord. Oh dear! When I think of what I saw three days ago!' 

'What did you see?' 

Aplegatt quickly related the events in Anchor. Dijkstra listened, his powerful arms folded across 
his chest. 

'The Professor...', he said thoughtfully. 'Heimo Kantor and Little Yaxa. Slain by a witcher. At 
Anchor, on the road to Gors Velen, or Thanedd, Garstang... And the Lion Cub is dead?' 

'What are you saying, milord?' 

'It's of no importance.' Dijkstra looked up. 'At least, not to you. Rest. And at dawn, go.' 

Aplegatt ate what he was given, and stretched out a bit. He was so tired, he barely had time to 
blink. Before dawn he had already passed the city gates. His stallion was certainly frisky, but 
reluctant. Aplegatt didn't like that kind of horse. 

On his shoulders, between his left shoulder blade and his spine, something itched unbearably; no 
doubt, some flea had bitten him while he dozed in the barn. And no way to scratch it. 

The stallion pranced and whinnied. The messenger spurred it and took off at a gallop. Time was of 
the essence. 

 

*** 

 

'Gar'ean', whistled Cairbre. Hidden behind the branches of a tree, he watched the road. He leaned. 
'En Dh'oine aen evall a stráede!' 

Toruviel leapt up, she grabbed her sword and adjusted it; with the tip of her boot, she kicked 
Yaevinn, who was sleeping near her in a clearing, in the thigh. The elf jumped, and cursed, burned on 
the hot sand where he placed his hand. 


'Que suecc's?' 

'A horse on the road.' 

'A horse?' Yaevinn grabbed his bow and quiver. 'Cairbre? Just one?' 

'Yes. He's getting closer.' 

'Well! Let's fix him. That'll make one less Dh'oine.' 

'Leave it.' Toruviel grabbed him by the sleeve. 'What's the point? We're supposed to be scouting, 
then it's back to the commando. Must we really kill civilians on the road? Is this what the fight for 
liberty has come to?' 

'Exactly, yes. Move.' 

'If we leave a body on the road, the next patrol that passes will sound the alarm. The army will 
come after us. They'll be watching the fords. We might have trouble crossing rivers.' 

'Hardly anyone comes this way. We'll be long gone by the time they find the body.' 

'This rider is long gone too', said Cairbre from his treetop perch. 'Instead of chatting, you should 
have shot. Now you won't be able to hit him. He's at least two hundred yards away.' 

'With my sixty-six pounds?' Yaevinn caressed his bow. 'With my lovely thirty inch engine? 
Anyway, that's not two hundred yards. One fifty, max. Mire, que spar aen'le.' 

'Yaevinn, leave it...' 

'Thaess aep, Toruviel.' 

The elf spun his cap around so that the squirrel tail attached to it was out of his line of sight, drew 
his bow up to his ear with strength, aimed with precision and let go the string. 

Aplegatt never heard the arrow. It was a silent arrow, specially fletched with long, narrow grey 
feathers. The arrow was equipped with a grooved shaft to make it lighter and more rigid. The point 
with its three razor sharp blades, quickly reached its target in the middle of the back, between his left 
shoulder blade and his spine. The blades were mounted such that they radiate from the centre; upon 
entering the body, the point turns like a screw and eviscerates the tissue, and shatters the bone. 
Aplegatt slumped forward onto his mount's neck, then slid to the ground, inert like dead weight. 

On the ground, the sand was warm, burning even in the beating sun. But the messenger never felt 
it. He was killed instantly. 

 

 


To say that I knew her would be an exaggeration. I think that no one, save the Witcher and the 
Sorceress, had really come to know her. The first time I saw her, she didn't make a big impression on 
me, even despite the unusual circumstances surrounding our meeting. I've known people who claimed 
that from the moment they'd seen her they could feel the breath of death following the girl. To me, 
however, she appeared perfectly ordinary even though I knew that she was anything but – which is 
why I earnestly tried to see, to discover, to feel the oddity in her. But I couldn't see nor feel anything. 
Anything that would be a signal, an omen or a foreshadowing of the tragic events to come. Those that 
happened because of her. And those that she'd caused herself. 

Dandelion. 'Half a century of poetry' 

 


