Chapter Seven 

 

 

 'Look at her. Sunburned, full of wounds, dirty. She is still drinking like a sponge and hungry. I fear 
for her. She came from the east, I tell you. Passed through the Korath. Through the Frying Pan.' 

 'Stories! Nobody survives the pan. She came west from the mountains by the passage of Suchaka. 
She is barely on the edge of the Korath and she had already had enough. When we found her she had 
already fallen and her spirit broken.' 

 'It is uninhabited for many miles to the west of here. Where did she come from?' 

 'She walked, perhaps rode. For who knows how long. There were horse footprints beside her own. 
Must have been thrown from the horse in the Suchaka, would explain why she is beaten and bruised.' 

 'Why is this story so important to Nilfgaard, out of curiosity? When the governor sent for us, I 
thought that some noble lady was lost. And what is this? An ordinary slut, a sweeper in rags, and on 
top of that dumb and brainless. I don't know if we have found the girl who was...' 

 'She is. And she is no ordinary girl. An ordinary girl, we would have found dead.' 

 'She's not far off. And rain wouldn't have saved her. Plague, the oldest of beggars cannot 
remember it raining on the Pan. The clouds always pass by the Korath... Even when it rains in the 
valley, no drop falls there!' 

 'Another week in these hills and there will be nothing to eat... Hey, you cocksucker! Do you like 
beef jerky? How about dry bread?' 

 'Ask her in Elvish. Or Nilfgaardian. Perhaps she doesn't understand common. She is elf spawn...' 

 'She is an oaf. When I put her on the horse this morning, she sat like a puppet made of wood.' 

 'Get your eyes fixed.' The powerful and balding one called Skomlik flashed his teeth. 'You won't 
get far in the Trappers. She is neither stupid nor crazy. She is only pretending. She is a rare and 
cunning bird.' 

 'Why is she so important to Nilfgaard? The promised reward has sent patrols everywhere... Why?' 

 'I don't know. But it would not hurt to ask her... With a stick across her back, ask your... Ha! Was 
she looking at me? She understands everything, she's been listening attentively. Hey, girl! I'm 
Skomlik, a hunter, of the so called Trappers. And this is, a stick –called stick! Do you like the skin on 
your back? Then start talking...' 

 'Enough! Silence!' 

 The command was shouted, loudly which did not tolerate any opposition which came from the 
other fire, where sat the knight and his squire. 

 'Bored Trappers?' The knight asked menacingly. 'Then get to work! The horses need cleaning! Get 
my armour and weapons clean! Get to the forest for firewood! And do not touch the girl! 
Understood?' 


 'Certainly, Lord Sweers' Skomlik muttered. His comrades bowed their heads. 

 'Get to work! Carry out his orders!' The Trappers began to bustle. 

 'Destiny punished us with this bastard.' Muttered one. 'The governor had nothing else to do but put 
us in league with a fucking knight...' 

 'I'll say' muttered a second under his breath, looking sideways 'After all it was us Trappers who 
found the girl. Our noses were the ones that made us ride the Suchaka.' 

 'Right. The credit will be ours and so will the reward... We'll get the money, florins in a heap at 
our feet, for us Trapper, and we'll thank the governor...' 

 'Shut the fuck up' hissed Skomlik 'they're going to hear you...' 

 Ciri was left alone by the fire. The Knight and the Squire looked at her questioningly, but did not 
speak. 

 The Knight was an old man but strong, with a stern countenance marked by scars. During the trip, 
he always wore the helmet with the wings of a bird, but they were not the wings Ciri had seen in her 
nightmares, and then again on the island of Thanedd. He was not the Black Knight of Cintra. But he 
was a Nilfgaardian Knight. When giving orders, he spoke smoothly, but with a distinct accent, the 
accent was similar to elves. With his squire, a boy not much older than Ciri, he spoke in a language 
similar to the Elder Speech, but less melodious, more harsh. It must have been the Nilfgaardian 
tongue. Ciri, who was well acquainted with the Elder Speech, understood most of the words. But she 
did not betray this. During the first stop on the edge of the desert they called the Frying Pan or Korath, 
the Nilfgaardian knight and his squire showered her with questions. She did not respond because she 
was stunned and confused and only half conscious. After several days of travel, when they left the 
rocky cliffs and enter into a green valley, Ciri came to her senses, she began at last to see the world 
around her and react sluggishly. But she still did not answer the questions, so the knight stopped 
addressing her. It seemed that he was not paying attention. He dealt with only the wild men who 
called themselves the Trappers. They also asked. They were very aggressive. 

 But the winged helmet Nilfgaardian immediately called them to order. It was clear who was the 
master and who the servant. 

 Ciri pretended to be dumb, but carefully listened. Slowly she began to understand the situation. She 
had fallen into the hands of Nilfgaard. Nilfgaard had been looking for her and found her, probably 
following the route she had taken from where the chaotic teleporter from Tor Lara had sent her. What 
Yennefer had failed to do, what Geralt had failed to do, the winged helmet knight from Nilfgaard and 
his band of Trappers had succeeded. 

 What happened on Thanedd to Yennefer and Geralt? Where was she? She had a terrible suspicion. 
The Trappers and their leader, Skomlik, talked in a simplistic and clumsy version of the common 
language, but with a Nilfgaardian accent. The Trappers were normal people, but served a Knight of 
Nilfgaard. The Trappers were happy at the thought of a reward that the governor would pay for 
finding Ciri. In florins. 

 The only countries where the currency was the florin and the people served governors that managed 
the imperial provinces, where in the South. 

 

*** 

 

 The next day, on the banks at the edge of a stream, Ciri started thinking about the possibility of 
escape. Her magic could help. Carefully, she tried a simple spell, a weak telekinesis. But her fears 
were confirmed. There wasn't even a spark of magical energy. After playing with the fire, her magical 
ability had left her entirely. 

 She fell back into indifference. She withdrew into herself and sank into apathy. For a long time. 

 Until the day they rode through a moor and the Blue Knight crossed their path. 

 

*** 

 

 'Ai, ai' Skomlik muttered, looking at the horse that barred their way. 'It is Varnhagen, from the 
fortress of Sarda...' 


 Horsemen approached. At the head, on a powerful horse, was a giant wearing iron armour which 
shone with blue tones. Alongside him was another man in armour, behind were two riders in simple 
grey clothes, undoubtedly pages. 

 The winged helmet Nilfgaardian approached them, holding his dancing bay one step away. His 
squire stroked the hilt of his sword and swung into the saddle. 

 'Stay back and take care of the girl.' He shouted at Skomlik and the Trappers. 'Do not meddle!' 

 'We are not drunks,' Skomlik said quietly as the squire moved away. 'We are not drunks that 
interfere with the quarrels of the Lords of Nilfgaard...' 

 'Will there be a fight Skomlik?' 

 'Inevitably. Between Sweers and Varnhagen there is hatred of family and blood vengeance. Guard 
the girl. If we are lucky, we will take all the reward for her.' 

 'It's a sure thing that Varnhagen is also looking for the girl. If he prevails, we will only be four...' 

 'Five.' Skomlik smiled. 'That one behind Sarda is my family. You'll see, this brawl will benefit us 
and not the knights...' 

 The knight in blue armour reined in his horse. The knight with the winged helmet stood opposite. 
Blue's companion stayed behind. His strange helmet was adorned with two leather straps that hung 
from his visor and looked like two big moustaches or walrus tusks. Across his saddle he held a 
menacing weapon, which resembled a little spear, much like what was used by the guards of Cintra, 
but with a much shorter haft and a longer spearhead. 

 Winged and Blue exchanged a few words. Ciri could not hear what, but the tone of the two knights 
left no room for doubt. These were not words of friends. Blue suddenly rose in the saddle, pointed 
sharply at Ciri and said something loudly and angrily. Winged shouted in response equally angry and 
waved his hand covered in an armoured gauntlet, presumably to tell Blue to go away. And so it began. 

 Blue spurred his spurs into the sides of his dapple and leaned forward; raising the axe he had carried 
attached to his saddle. Winged edged forward his bay and drew his sword from its sheath. However 
before the armed men had time to engage in the fight, Two Tusks attacked, spurring his horse into a 
gallop with the haft of his spear. Winged squire threw himself at him, drawing his sword, but Two 
Tusks shifted in his saddle and jabbed his spear into the squire's chest. The long spearhead pierced 
with a bang through the breastplate, the squire cried piercingly and fell from his horse onto the ground 
with both hands gripping the shaft that was sticking from his chest. 

 Winged and Blue collided with a crash and thud. The axe was more dangerous but the sword was 
faster. Blue was hit in the shoulder; a piece of metal flew to one side, the rider turned and pulled the 
reins, he reeled in the saddle, crimson streaks started to flow down the blue armour. The fighters 
separated at a gallop. The winged Nilfgaardian turned his horse, but Two Tusks fell upon him, 
grabbing his sword with both hands, readying to strike. Winged pulled on the reins, but Two Tusks 
leading his horse with only his knees, galloped alongside. Winged managed to hack at him in passing. 
Before Ciri's eyes, the metal cracked and sheets of blood burst forth. 

 Blue had already returned, brandishing his axe and yelling. Both armoured opponents exchanged 
blows and broke apart. Two Tusks fell back onto Winged, horses colliding and swords rang. Two 
Tusks cut at Winged, smashing into his bracers and shield. Winged straightened and struck a powerful 
blow into the right side of Two Tusks' breastplate. Two Tusks swayed in the saddle. Winged stood in 
his stirrups and swung again with force, and tore between the shoulder and helmet. The broad and 
sharp sword pierced with a loud bang on the metal, and got stuck. Two Tusks tensed and shuddered. 
The horses withdrew, kicking and biting the bit. Winged leaned against the saddlebow and pulled at 
the sword. Two Tusks slipped from his saddle under the hooves of the horses. The horse's shoes 
struck and crushed the armour. 

 Blue turned his dapple around again and attacked, raising his axe. He guided the horse with 
difficulty using his wounded hand. Winged noticed and skilfully went right, straightened in his 
stirrups and launched a terrible blow. Blue parried with his axe which pulled the sword from the hands 
of Winged. The horses crashed together again. Blue was a powerful man, the heavy axe in his hands 
rose and fell like a stick. It fell onto the armour of Winged with a loud crash and the bay was almost 
knocked to her haunches. Winged staggered, but held his place in the saddle. Before the axe could fall 
again, he dropped his reins and his left hand, grasping a heavy angular mace hanging from a leather 


sling, and struck a blow to the blue helmet. The helmet rang like a bell, now it was Blue who was 
rocking in the saddle. The horses groaned, trying to bite each other and did not want to separate. 

 Blue, clearly stunned by the blow of the mace, still got a hit in with his axe to his opponent's 
breastplate. The fact that both were still in their saddles seemed a miracle, but it was simply caused by 
the high pommel they were holding. Down the sides of both horse flowed blood, especially visible on 
the dapple. Ciri watched in horror. In Kaer Morhen they had taught her how to fight, but she could not 
imagine how she could face up against one of these strongmen. Or even stop one of those powerful 
blows. 

 Blue grabbed with both hands the handle of the axe that was stuck deep into the chest of Winged, 
straightened and pulled, trying to knock his opponent out of the saddle. Winged hit him hard with his 
club, once, twice, thrice. The blood spurted from under his helmet onto the blue armour and grey 
collar. Winged jabbed at the bay with his spurs, the sudden jump of the horse pulled the sharp axe 
from his breastplate. Blue, who was leaning on his saddlebow, dropped the handle. Winged changed 
his mace to his right hand, threw it and struck a terrible blow to the head of Blue's horse. Holding the 
reins of the horse in his free hand, the Nilfgaardian hit with the mace, the blue armour sounded like a 
smelting iron, blood flowed from under the shattered helmet. Yet another blow and Blue fell head first 
under the horse's hooves. The dapple backed away, but the bay, obviously trained for it, kicked the 
fallen knight with a crash. Blue was still alive, as attesting to his desperate cries of pain. The bay 
continued to kick him with such force, that Winged, wounded could not sustain his seat and fell with a 
crash next to Blue. 

 'They've both been killed.' Groaned the Trapper who had hold of Ciri. 

 'Sir Knights, to hell with them.' Spat another. 

 The pages of Blue watched from afar. One of them turned his horse. 

 'Stop, Remiz!' Skomlik screamed. 'Where are you going? To Sarda? Do you hurry to the scaffold?' 
The pages stopped, one looked, shading his eyes with his hand. 

 'Is that you Skomlik?' 

 'Yes! Come Remiz, fear not! Knightly feuds are none of our business!' 

 Ciri suddenly had enough of indifference. Nimbly slipping from her captor, she started running, 
caught Blue's dapple and with a jump was in the saddle with high anxiety. 

 She would have gotten away, had the pages from Sarda not been in their saddles and not had fresh 
horses. They caught her easily, grabbing the reins. She jumped off and rushed towards the forest, but 
the horsemen caught up with her again. One grabbed her by her hair, pulled and started to drag her. 
Ciri screamed and clung to his hand. The riders threw her directly at the feet of Skomlik. He swung 
his stick, it whistled; Ciri screamed and curled up, covering her head with her hands. The stick 
whistled again and hit her on the hands. She rolled on the floor, but Skomlik approached, kicked her 
and put his boot on her back. 

 'You want to flee, bitch?' 

 The stick whistled. Ciri howled. Skomlik struck again and poked her in the back. 

 'Do not hit me!' She cried, shrinking back from him. 

 'So you do speak, bitch! Maybe you'll miss your tongue? I'll do...' 

 "Remember, Skomlik!' Shouted one of the Trappers. 'Do you want to slay her, or what? She's 
worth too much to throw away!' 

 'Lightning,' Remiz said, dismounting. 'Is this who Nilfgaard has been looking for, for a week?' 

 'She is.' 

 'Ha! All the garrisons seek her! You do not know how important this person is to Nilfgaard! They 
said that a powerful wizard was loose somewhere in the area. Such was spoken of in Sarda. Where did 
you catch her?' 

 'In the Pan.' 

 'You lie!' 

 'She was, she was' said Skomlik angrily. 'We have her and the reward is ours! Why are you 
standing around like mummies? Tie this bitch to the saddle! We are getting out of here, fellows!' 

 'The noble Sweers' said one of the Traps, 'is still breathing...' 


 'Not for long. Slit his throat! We go straight to Amarillo, fellows, to see the governor. We grabbed 
the girl and now the reward.' 

 'To Amarillo?' said Remiz scratching his forehead, looking at the recent field of battle. 'There we 
will be greeted by the executioner! What will you tell the governor? The Knights were defeated but 
you are okay? When the whole thing is revealed, the governor will send you to hang, and we will be 
sent to Sarda... And there the Varnhagens will skin us in strips. You can go to Amarillo, but I'm 
staying in the forests...' 

 'You are my family, Remiz.' Skomlik said. 'Even though you are a whoreson because you gave one 
to my sister, you're still a relative. So I'll save your skin. We will go to Amarillo, I say. The governor 
knows that between Sweers and Varnhagen there were matters of family. They met; they fought each 
other, the usual thing with them. And what did we do? The girl ran, and we found her later. We are 
Trappers. And now you to are a Trapper, Remiz. The governor will have no fucking idea what went 
on with Sweers. We are not going to tell...' 

 'Aren't you forgetting something, Skomlik?' Remiz asked while eyeing the other page from Sarda. 

 Skomlik slowly turned and suddenly pulled out a knife and plunged it into the throat of the page. 
The page gurgled and collapsed to the ground. 

 'I did not forget.' Said the Trapper coldly. 'Well, now it is you and us. There are no witnesses, and 
now there are less heads for the reward. To the horses, fellows to Amarillo! It is still a long way 
between us and the reward. There is no time to waste!' 

 

*** 

 

 When they emerged from the dark and humid forest, they saw a village at the foot of the mountain, 
a few thatched roofs within a circle formed by a low stockade which separated them from a small 
meandering river. 

 The wind brought the smell of smoke. Ciri moved her numb hands, which were tied with ropes to 
the pommel of the saddle. She was completely numb, her buttocks ached unbearably, and a full 
bladder teased her. She had been in the saddle since sunrise. At night she could not rest because she 
was forced to sleep with her hands tied to the wrists of two separate Trappers lying on either side of 
her. With each of her movements, the Trappers reacted with profanities and threats to her life. 

 'A farmhouse,' said one. 

 'I see,' replied Skomlik. 

 Coming out from the forest the hooves of the horses were surrounded by tall, sunburnt grass. They 
soon found themselves on a bumpy road leading down to the village, towards a bridge and a wooden 
gate in the palisade. 

 Skomlik stopped his horse and stood in the stirrups. 

 'What is this village? We have never stopped here. Remiz, do you know this area?' 

 'Before' Remiz said 'this town was called White River. But a revolt began; some of those here 
joined the rebels, then Varnhagen of Sarda raised the village and put people to death or took them as 
servants. Now only Nilfgaardian farmers inhabit here, all peasants. And they now call the village 
Glyswen. The farmers are believed to be bad people. I say we do not halt here. Let us go further.' 

 'We must give the horses a break,' said one of the Trappers. 'And fodder. And it sounds to me like 
musicians are playing inside. If they give us trouble, these peasants, I'll wave the order from the 
governor before their noses, the governor is a Nilfgaardian as they are. It will quickly bring them to 
their knees.' 

 'Oh, yes,' growled Skomlik 'I've not seen any Nilfgaardian who kneel. Remiz, is there an inn in 
Glyswen?' 

 'There is, Varnhagen did not burn it.' 

 Skomlik turned in his saddle and looked at Ciri. 

 'We'll have to disguise her. Lest anyone recognise her... Give me a cloak. And put the hood up 
over her head... Go! Are you ready, slut?' 

 'I have to go behind the bushes...' 


 'I'll give you bushes, bitch! Crouch on the road! And do not forget: in the village or in the open, do 
not think you are clever! One peep and I'll cut your throat. If I don't get the reward for you, not one 
will.' 

 The rode up at a walk, the horse's hooves echoed on the bridge. At once from behind the stockade 
figures emerged armed with spears. 

 'They guard the gate,' whispered Remiz. 'I'm curious to know why...' 

 'Me too,' Skomlik replied, rising up in his stirrups. 'They guard the gate and the by the mill the 
barrier has fallen and once could drive a cart through there...' 

 They approached and then reined in their horses. 

 'Greetings, gentlemen!' Skomlik shouted jovially, if somewhat unnatural. 'Good morning!' 

 'Who are you?' asked the taller of the farmers. 

 'We, my friend, are the military,' lied Skomlik leaning over his saddle. 'in the service of our 
master, the governor of Amarillo.' 

 The farmer ran his hand along the shaft of his spear, looked askance at Skomlik. Doubtlessly not 
knowing he was addressing a Trapper. 

 'His lordship the governor of Amarillo sent us here.' Skomlik continued his lie. 'To see how faired 
his countrymen, the good people of Glyswen.' 

 'We are doing fine.' The farmer said. Ciri noted that he spoke common like Winged, with the same 
accent and style of speaking, although he tried to imitate Skomlik's jargon. 'We are used to coping 
alone.' 

 'The governor will be content, when we recount this to him. Is the inn open? We have dry 
throats...' 

 'It's open.' The farmer said darkly. 'At the moment, it is open.' 

 'For how long?' 

 'For now. Soon the inn will be stripped of its rafters and planks to put onto the granary. We get no 
benefit from the inn. We are too busy working, to go to the inn. Only strangers come to the inn, and 
people who we are not happy with. Those are the ones who stay there.' 

 'Who?' Remiz paled slightly. 'People from the fortress of Sarda? Could they be the noble lords of 
Varnhagen?' 

 'The farmer frowned and his lips moved as if from a desire to spit. 

 'No, unfortunately. It is the militia of the Baron. The Nissir.' 

 'Who are the Nissir?' Skomlik frowned. "And where are they? And under whose command?' 

 'There is one older than them all, tall, dark, moustachioed like a catfish.' 

 'Heh!' Skomlik turned to his comrades. 'Excellent. This one sounds familiar, no? It sounds like our 
old friend Vercta "Trust me", remember him? And what is this man and the Nissir doing in your 
town?' 

 'The Nissir,' the farmer said darkly, 'are bound for Tyffi. We are honoured by the visit. They carry 
a prisoner. He belongs to the gang of Rats.' 

 'Sure!' Remiz snorted. 'And what would you have the militia of the Emperor do?' 

 The farmer frowned; his hands shook on the haft of the spear. His companions murmured softly. 

 'Ride to the inn, gentlemen.' The muscles in the farmer's jaw shook vigorously. 'And talk to the 
Nissir, your companions. You are in the service of the governor. Ask, then why are they taking the 
bandit to Tyffi, rather than nailing him to a pole with the oxen, here in town, just as the governor 
charges. And remind your Nissir friends that the power here is not the Baron of Tyffi. We already 
have the oxen yoke and the sharpened stakes. If the Nissir refuse, we will do what is necessary. Tell 
them.' 

 'I'll tell them.' Skomlik winked to his comrades. 'Farewell, gentlemen.' 

 They set off at a walk between the huts. The village appeared deserted, there was not a soul. Under 
one of the fences a gaunt pig rolled in the mud. A large black cat dash across the path of the riders. 

 'Pah, fuckin cat!' Remiz leaned to one side of his saddle and spat, then cross his fingers in a sign of 
protection against the evil eye. 'Bloody thing crossed in front of us!' 

 'I hope it chokes on the mouse in its gullet.' 

 'What?' Skomlik looked around. 


 'A cat. Black as pitch. It crossed the road.' 

 'The devil with it.' Skomlik looked around again. 'Look around, it seems deserted. But I have seen 
glances that people were home. And I saw at another door a man with a spear.' 

 'Caring for the females,' laughed the one who wished mouse problems upon the cat. 'The Nissir 
are in town! Did you hear what the farmer said? He doesn't like the Nissir.' 

 'And no wonder. "Trust me" and his company do not forgive. Eh, the Nissir are not looking or 
anything. The Barons appoint them "Guardians of Order", so they are charged to keep it and to keep 
the roads. Shout in a peasant's ear: "Nissir!" and he'll be scared with shit running down his legs. 
However from time to time. Just as a calf goes to slaughter, they'll find a back bone and then it's more 
than farmers that are nailed in the winter, you'll see. You saw those at the gate, they had fierce 
mouths? These are settlers from Nilfgaard. No joking with them... Ha, here is the inn...' 

 They spurred their horses. 

 The inn has a thatched roof, slightly sunken and heavily covered in moss. It was some distance 
from the huts and utilitarian buildings; it however marked the central point of the entire land 
surrounded by the broken palisade, where the two paths crossed through the village. In the shadow of 
the only large tree around, lay a corral, for livestock and horses. Of the latter there were five or six 
horses unsaddled. In front of the doors, on the stairs, sat two men dressed in leather doublets and 
pointed leather hats. Both of them hugged to their chests a few jars of clay and they had a bowl full of 
gnawed bones. 

 'Who are you?' Shouted one of the men at the sight of Skomlik and his company, as they 
dismounted. 'What do you seek? You'd better be on your way! The inn has been occupied on behalf 
of the law!' 

 'Do not shout, Nissir, do not shout.' Skomlik said, pulling Ciri down from the saddle. 'The gates 
were open and we entered. Your commander, Vercta is our friend.' 

 'I don't know you!' 

 'Because you are a fledgling! "Trust me", and I even served together in the old days, before he 
came here to Nilfgaard.' 

 'Well, if so...' Said the man hesitantly, dropping his hand to the hilt of his sword. 'Go in. I don't 
give a shit...' 

 Skomlik pushed Ciri, another trapper grabbed her collar. They went inside. 

 Inside it was dark and stuffy and smelled of smoke and burning things. The inn appeared almost 
empty; only one table was occupied standing directly in the streak of light that came through the 
window of fish membranes. Sitting at it were several men. In the background, near the fireplace, the 
innkeeper was busy, rattling pots. 

 'Honour to the lords of Nissir!' Skomlik boomed. 

 'We do not honour any ox.' Snapped one of the company sitting by the window, spitting on the 
floor. Another stopped him with a gesture. 

 'Quiet,' he said. 'These are our fellows, do you not recognise them? Skomlik and his Trappers. 
Welcome, welcome!' 

 Skomlik beamed and walked towards the table, but stopped when his eyes fixed on the pole that 
supported the beam. Next to the pole sitting on a stool was a thin, blond boy of less than twenty years, 
strangely bent and twisted. Ciri realized that the unnatural position stemmed from the fact that the 
boy's hands were twisted back and tied, and his neck was attached to the pole by a leather belt. 

 'May I be showered with pustules!' One of the trappers that had seized Ciri's neck, snorted loudly. 
'Look, Skomlik! It's Kayleigh!' 

 'Kayleigh? It can't be!' 

 One of the Nissir sitting at the table, a fat man with hair cut into a picturesque forelock, bust out in 
a loud guttural laugh. 

 'It can be.' He said, licking a spoon. 'It's Kayleigh, in his filthy person. It paid off to get up at 
dawn. He shall fetch me at least thirty florins in good imperial coin.' 

 'Kayleigh, well, well.' Skomlik frowned. 'That means the Nilfgaardian yokel spoke the truth...' 

 'Thirty florins, damn.' Remiz sighed. 'That is something... Lutz, Baron of Tyffi pays it?' 


 'Yes' confirmed another Nissir with brown hair and a moustache. 'Lutz of Tyffi, our lord and 
benefactor, is a powerful baron. The Rats robbed his governor on the highway, he is burning with rage 
and has put up a reward. And we, Skomlik, will take this reward, trust me. Ha, just look at the men 
here, like puffed up owls. It was not to their taste that we captured the Rat, we also have been ordered 
to track down the leader of the gang!' 

 'Trapper Skomlik,' the fat man with the pointed forelock, indicated Ciri with his spoon 'you also 
caught something. A little girl. Do you see, Vercta?' 

 'I see,' a man with black whiskers flashed his teeth. 'Skomlik are you so pressed by poverty, that 
you are stealing children for ransom? Who is this slut?' 

 'Never you mind!' 

 'Wow that was fierce.' Laughed, the man with the forelock. 'We just want to make sure she is not 
your daughter.' 

 'He's daughter?' Vercta, the man with the black moustache laughed. 'I say, to have a daughter 
means he'd have to have balls.' 

 The Nissir roared with laughter. 

 'Ah, look mutton heads!' Skomlik yelled. 'To you Vercta, I'll say no more, but before Sunday, 
you'll be amazed who will be most famous, you and your Rat or me and what I do. And we'll see who 
is more generous: your Baron or the imperial governor of Amarillo!' 

 'You can kiss my ass.' Vercta said contemptuously returning to his soup. 'Along with your 
governor, the Emperor and all of Nilfgaard, trust me. I do not care. Even I know that Nilfgaard seeks a 
girl. I know there are rewards for her. But I don't care shit for it. I've served the governors and 
Nilfgaardians and I spit on them. I now serve Baron Lutz and answer only to him and nobody is hurt.' 

 'Your Baron,' Skomlik croaked 'serves Nilfgaard, he licks the boots of the Nilfgaardians. So do not 
speak so casually!' 

 'Do not shout,' said the Nissir in a conciliatory tone. 'I should not have spoken against you, trust 
me. That you have the girl the Nilfgaardians are looking for is a good thing. I'd see with pleasure that 
you take the reward and not those fucking Nilfgaardians. And you serve the governor? Nobody 
chooses the masters, they would choose, right? Come on, sit down with us and let us drink to this 
meeting.' 

 'Well, why not.' Skomlik agreed. 'Just give me a length of rope. I'll tie the girl to the pole with 
your Rat, okay?' 

 The Nissir roared with laughter. 

 'Skomlik, the terror of the border!' Laughed the man with the large forelock. 'The armed wing of 
Nilfgaard! Come on Skomlik, tie her up nice and strong. But use an iron chain, because this famous 
prisoner is ready to break the rope and break your noses before fleeing. She looks so dangerous that 
even my hair is standing on end.' 

 Skomlik and even his companions burst out laughing. The Trapper flushed, dropped the rope and 
approached the table. 

 'I meant for security, not to take...' 

 'Do not worry about these asses.' Vercta interrupted, breaking the bread in his hands. 'You want to 
talk, sit down and wait in queue. And this girl, you can hang her by her legs from the ceiling. I don't 
care a pig's shit. It is terribly funny, Skomlik. For you and your governor she is perhaps an important 
prisoner, but to me she is an emaciated and scared kid. Do you want to tie her up? She's, trust me, 
barely able to stand upright, so how is she going to flee. What are you afraid of?' 

 "I'll tell you what I'm afraid of.' Skomlik bit his lip. 'This is a Nilfgaardian village. Here we have 
not been welcomed with bread and salt, and for your Rat, they say they have a sharpened stick. And 
that is their right; the governor has decreed that justice is to be done to bandits at the site of their 
capture. And if the prisoner is not given to them, they are ready to sharpen sticks for you all.' 

 'Oh dear,' said the man with the forelock. 'Crows frighten them. They better not put us in the 
midst of this or we will make their blood flow.' 

 'We will not give over the Rat.' Said Vercta. 'We go to Tyffi. Baron Lutz can fix the issue with the 
governor. Ah, let them chatter in vain. Sit down.' 


 The trapper, let go of his sword belt, at the table the happy Nissir started yelling for the innkeeper. 
Skomlik grabbed a stool and kicked it towards the pole, grabbed Ciri by the shoulders and pushed her 
so she fell, hitting her arm on the bound boy's knees. 

 'Stay here.' He growled. 'And don't move, you wiggle like a bitch.' 

 'You louse.' Cried the boy, looking at him with narrowed eyes. 'You dog...' 

 Ciri did not know most of the words that flew out of the boys crooked and crumpled mouth, but by 
the changes occurring on Skomlik's face she concluded that the words must have been incredibly 
filthy and offensive. The trapper paled with rage, his hands shook, he hit the bound boy in the face, 
grabbed him by his long hair and shook him, hitting the boy's forehead into the pole. 

 'Hey!' Cried Vercta, while rising from the table. 'What's happening here?' 

 'I'm removing the fangs from this filthy rat!' Skomlik growled. 'I'll put both of my feet up his ass!' 

 'Come here and stop tearing at his throat.' The Nissir sat down, taking a gulp of beer from his mug 
then wiped his moustache, 'Your prisoner can sit, we won't stay long. And you, Kayleigh, don't play 
the daredevil. Sit quietly and think about the scaffold which Baron Lutz has order be erected in town. 
The list of things the Baron is going to do to you is already written and trust me, it is three cubits long. 
Half the town has already bet to see how long you will hold. So save your strength Rat. I put a small 
sum of money on it myself and I hope that you do not disappoint me and hold out until at least 
castration.' 

 Kayleigh turned his head and spat, as much as the belt around his neck would allow. Skomlik 
pulled up his belt and measured Ciri with a malevolent look, then joined the company at the table, 
cursing, because the pitcher that the innkeeper had bought only had a few remnants of foam. 

 'How did you take Kayleigh?' He asked, indicating his desire to extend his order to the innkeeper. 
'And on top of that, alive! Because his position in the Rats, I'll give you credit.' 

 'In truth,' Vercta said, looking critically at what he had just removed from his nose, 'we were 
lucky, that's all. He split off from the gang to go through New Forge to see a wench and spend the 
night. The mayor, who knew we were not far, sent out a call. We were able to arrive before dawn and 
got him in the haystack, before he had time to chirp.' 

 'And his wench entertained us all.' Laughed the big man with the forelock. 'Apparently her night 
with Kayleigh hadn't satisfied her. When we were done with her she couldn't move her arms or legs.' 

 'Well then I say this to you bastards.' Skomlik said loudly and mockingly. 'You could have had 
more money. Instead of wasting time with the girl, you could have been applying heat to the Rat to 
find where the gang spent the night. You could have had Giselher and Reef... Just for Giselher, the 
Varnhagen of Sarda where offering twenty florins a year ago. And that fucker, what's her name ... 
Mistle, I think... For her the governor would have given more money after what she did to his nephew 
in Druigh when the Rats raided a convoy.' 

 'You, Skomlik,' scowled Vercta 'are either stupid by nature, or this hard life has screwed with your 
head. We are a party of six. Was I going to attack the whole gang myself? And the reward will not 
escape us. Baron Lutz is going to roast Kayleigh's heels in the dungeon, not waste time, trust me. 
Kayleigh is going to sing, giving us all the hiding places and shelters, and then we'll go with a strong 
band, surround them and take them out like a crab from a shell.' 

 'It's clear. They are going to wait. When they learn that you captured Kayleigh they will go into 
other shelters and hideouts. No, Vercta, you have to look at the truth. You swapped the reward for a 
romp with a maid. You are so... you have only shit in your heads.' 

 'You are the fool!' Vercta stood. 'If you are in such a hurry, go after the Rats yourself along with 
your heroes! But take heed, because hunting the Rats is not the same as catching a prepubescent girl!' 

 The Nissir and Trappers began to scream and throw curses at each other. The innkeeper promptly 
served more beer, grabbing an empty jar from the big man with the forelock, which was aimed at 
Skomlik. The scuffle soon settled down, the beer refreshed and soothed throats and temperaments. 

 'Bring food!' They cried to the fat innkeeper. 'Scrambled eggs with sausage, beans, bread and 
cheese!' 

 'And beer!' 

 'Why milk those eyes, Skomlik? Today we have money! We caught Kayleigh with his horse, purse, 
trinkets, sword, saddle and sheepskin, and everything we sold to the dwarves!' 


 'And we also sold the red slippers from his wench. And her necklace!' 

 'Ho, ho, what better reason to drink! Radem!' 

 'Why are you so happy? We have reason to drink, not you. You, with your important prisoner, you 
can have the snot from her nose and the fleas that bite her! Your prisoner and your spoils, ha, ha!' 

 'Son of a bitch!' 

 'Ha, ha, sit down, and close that mouth!' 

 'Let us drink to peace! We invite you!' 

 'Where are those scrambled eggs, innkeeper, the plague devour you! Make haste!' 

 'And bring beer!' 

 Ciri, curled up on the stool, raised her head, finding Kayleigh's angry green eyes looking at her 
from under a mattered mane of blond hair. A chill pierced her. Kayleigh's face, although not ugly, 
was evil, very evil. Ciri suddenly realised that this boy who was not much older than her was capable 
of anything. 

 'I think the gods have sent you to me,' whispered the Rat, his green eyes penetrating her. 'To think, 
I did not believe in them and they have sent you. Do not look, little idiot. You gotta help me... Give 
me your ear, plague...' 

 Ciri shrank even more, lowering her head. 

 'Listen' Kayleigh hissed, flashing his teeth which almost looked like a real rats. 'In a few moments 
when the innkeeper wanders by, cry out... Listen to me, dammit...' 

 'No,' she said. 'He'll beat me...' 

 Kayleigh's lips twitched and Ciri immediately understood that being hit by Skomlik was by no 
means the worst that could happen. Although Skomlik was big and Kayleigh was skinny and bound, 
she felt instinctively who she should be more afraid of. 

 'If you help me,' whispered the Rat. 'I'll help you. I am not alone. I have friends who will not leave 
you here... You understand? But when my friends arrive, when everything starts, I cannot be attached 
to this pole because I'll be chopped to pieces by these bastards... Listen to me, dammit. I'll tell you 
what to do...' 

 Ciri bowed her head even lower. Her lips trembled. 

 The Nissir and the Trappers gobbled the scrambled eggs like wild boar. The innkeeper returned 
from stirring a pot and brought to the table mugs of beer and a loaf of white bread. 

 'I'm hungry!' cried Ciri obediently, paling slightly. The innkeeper stopped, looked at her, then 
turned to the participants of the banquet. 

 'Can I give her some, gentlemen?' 

 'No!' Shouted Skomlik, flushing red and spitting scrambled eggs. 'Stay away from her, go near her 
and I'll break your legs! I forbid it! And you sit quiet, stop this mischief, or you'll...' 

 'Hey, hey, Skomlik, what did she do?' Vercta interjected, swallowing with effort bread topped with 
onions. 'Look at him guys, he eats with someone else's money, but spares the girl. Innkeeper, give the 
girl a bowl. I pay and I say who eats and who doesn't. And who doesn't like this can just leave on 
their hairy ass.' 

 Skomlik flushed even more, but said nothing. 

 'Something I just remembered' added Vercta. 'The Rat must be fed, so that he doesn't become 
anaemic on the road, because then the Baron will have our skins, trust me. Girl feed him. Hey 
innkeeper! Get some food for them! And you, Skomlik, what bothers you? What is it you dislike?' 

 'Keep an eye on her,' The Trapper nodded towards Ciri 'because she is a strange bird. If she was an 
ordinary girl, Nilfgaard would not be after her, the governor promised money...' 

 'If she is common or uncommon,' laughed the big man with the forelock 'I can show you, just look 
between her legs! What say you fellows? Do we take her out to the barn for a while?' 

 'Do not dare touch her!' Skomlik growled. 'I will not allow this!' 

 'There he goes! As if we asked permission from him!' 

 'This dispute is over my head, I'm to deliver her alive and well! The governor of Amarillo...' 

 'Shit on your governor. Did you drink at our expense and now you deny us one fuck? Eh, Skomlik, 
do not be stingy! Your head will not fall, fear not, nor will your profit be lessened! You will deliver 
her whole, a girl is not a bladder, she will not explode from a shagging.' 


 The Nissir burst into mocking laughter. Skomlik's companions echoed it. Ciri trembled, turned pale 
and looked up. Kayleigh smiled sarcastically. 

 'Do you understand now?' His lip whispered, slightly smiling. 'When they get drunk they will take 
you. Mistreat you. We are in the same boat. Do what I commanded. If I succeed, you also...' 

 'The food is ready!' Shouted the innkeeper, He did not have a Nilfgaardian accent. 'Come here, 
lady!' 

 'A knife.' Ciri whispered, taking the bowl from the innkeeper. 

 'What?' 

 'A knife. Quickly.' 

 'That is enough, no more!' Shouted the innkeeper unnaturally, squinting in the direction of the 
feasting and adding porridge into a bowl, 'Please leave.' 

 'A knife.' 

 'No. I feel for you, daughter but I cannot. I cannot, understand. Go...' 

 'From this inn,' she recited the words of Kayleigh in a trembling voice, 'no one will come out alive. 
A knife. Hurry. And when it starts, run away.' 

 'Hold the bowl, toad!' Shouted the innkeeper, turning so that he hid Ciri. He was pale and his teeth 
chattered. 'Closer to the pan!' 

 She felt the cold touch of a kitchen knife that he slipped from his belt, covering the handle with her 
tunic. 

 'Well done.' Kayleigh hissed. 'Sit down so you can shield me. Put the bowl in my lap. In your left 
hand take the spoon, in the right the knife. Now cut the rope. Not there, asshole, under the knot on the 
pole. Careful, they are looking.' 

 Ciri felt dryness in her throat. She bowed her head almost to the bowl. 

 'Feed me and eat some too.' His green eyes stared at her from under half closed lids, hypnotically. 
'Slowly, slowly. Be brave little one. If I get out, so do you...' 

 True, thought Ciri, while cutting the rope. The knife smelled of iron and onions, the edge was 
recessed from repeated sharpening. He is right, how do I know where these scoundrels are taking me? 
How do I know what this Nilfgaardian governor wants from me? Maybe what is waiting for me in 
Amarillo is the wheel, drills, pliers or red hot irons ... I will not be carried away like a lamb to 
slaughter. Better to take a chance... 

 With a roar the window flew inwards, together with the frame, from outside stumps that were used 
for chopping wood landed on the table, causing havoc among the bowls and mugs. Following in the 
footsteps of the stump, onto the table jumped a blond girl with short cut hair, wearing a red tunic and 
high shiny boots that reached above the knees. She knelt on the table, waving her sword. One of the 
Nissir, the slower one, did not have time to get up and back away, he fell back onto his stool, spraying 
blood from his slashed throat. She dropped lightly from the table, making room for a guy who jumped 
in through the window who was dressed in an embroidered sheepskin jacket. 

 'The Raaaatttsss!' Shouted Vercta, struggling with his sword which had gotten tangled in his belt. 

 The fat man with the forelock drew his weapon, jumped towards the girl kneeling on the floor, 
swung, but the girl while on her knees, deftly parried the blow then dropped to the ground, the boy in 
the sheepskin jacket, who had jumped down behind him, hit the Nissir with ease in the temple. The fat 
man hit the ground, like a mattress made of straw. 

 The doors of the inn were opened by a kick and two more rats entered the rom. The first was tall 
and swarthy and wore a studded jacket with a scarlet scarf tied at the front. This one, with two quick 
slashes of his sword, sent two trappers to separate corners, then cut at Vercta. The second, a broad-
shouldered blond sent a wide cut in the direction of Remiz, Skomlik's brother. The rest took flight 
towards the kitchen door. But the Rats were entering there as well. At the rear jumped suddenly a dark 
girl dressed in a colourful outfit. A quick thrust of her sword pierced one of the Trappers, then chased 
the another, and soon after skewed the innkeeper before he could yell who he was. 

 The room was filled with the noise and clashes of swords. Ciri hid behind the pole. 

 'Mistle!' Kayleigh shouted, having broken free from the ropes that bound him, was now wrestling 
with the strap around his neck that was still binding him to the pole. 'Giselher! Reef! To me!' 


 The Rats, however, were still busy fighting, though Skomlik heard Kayleigh's cry. The trapper 
turned around with the intention of nailing the Rat to the post. Ciri reacted quickly and instinctively; 
just like during the fight with the Wyvern in Gors Velen, like in Thanedd, all the movements she had 
learned in Kaer Morhen took over suddenly, almost without her participation. She jumped out from 
behind the pole, spun in pirouette; fell heavily on Skomlik, hitting him in the hip. She was too small 
and puny to dislodge the huge trapper, but managed to disrupt the rhythm of his movement. And turn 
his attention to her. 

 'You whore!' 

 Skomlik swung his sword and the air howled. Ciri's body again made the same economical dodge, 
the trapper almost fell over, following the path of his accelerating blade. Cursing vilely, he hacked 
again, putting the full force of his body behind the blow. Ciri jumped agilely aside, landing safely on 
her left foot and then spun in the opposite direction in a pirouette. Skomlik hacked again, but was 
unable to reach her. 

 Vercta abruptly fell between them, covered in blood. 

 The trapper stepped back and looked around. He was surrounded only by corpses. And the Rats 
were approaching from all sides with swords ready. 

 'Stand fast.' The swarthy one with the red scarf said coldly, finally releasing Kayleigh. 'It seems he 
wants to slice this girl at all costs. I don't know why. I do not know by what miracle you have not 
already done it. But let's give him a chance, since he wants it so much.' 

 'Give her a chance too.' Said Giselher, the one with the broad-shoulders. 'Let this be a fair fight. 
Give her iron, Iskra.' 

 Ciri felt in her hand the grip of a sword. It was a little too heavy. 

 Skomlik grunted furiously, threw himself upon her, brandishing his blade in front of him. He was 
too slow. Ciri avoided the feints and cuts through fast turns, without even trying to stop the blows 
raining down. The sword only served as a counterweight to facilitate her easy evasions. 

 'Incredible!' Laughed the girl with the short cut hair. 'She's an acrobat!' 

 'She is fast.' Said the one in the colourful outfit, who had given her the sword. 'Quick as an elf. 
Hey you! Perhaps you would prefer one of us? You are having no luck with her!' 

 Skomlik glanced back, then all of a sudden lunged at Ciri stretching like a heron with its beak. Ciri 
avoided the onslaught with a short feint, she turned. For a second she saw a swollen and throbbing 
vein on Skomlik's neck. She knew that in the position she was in he was unable to avoid her blow. 
She knew where and how to strike. 

 She did not strike. 

 'Enough of this.' She felt a hand on her shoulder. The girl in the colourful outfit pushed her, while 
two other Rats, the boy in the sheepskin jacket and short hair, herded Skomlik into a corner of the 
room, keeping him in check with their swords. 

 'Enough of this fun.' Repeated colourful outfit, Ciri turned to face her. 'This is taking a little too 
long. And it is your fault, girl. You can kill him, or not. I get the feeling you will not live long.' 

 Ciri trembled, looking at the big dark, almond shaped eyes, seeing bare teeth through a smile so 
small as to make it look ghostly. These were not human eyes or teeth. The girl in the bright outfit was 
an elf. 

 'Time to blow.' Giselher said sharply, the one with the scarlet scarf, evidently the leader. 'It really 
is taking too long! Mistle, finish off the bastard.' 

 Short cut hair approached, carrying a sword. 

 'Mercy!' Skomlik screamed, falling to his knees. 'Forgive my life! I have small children... Little 
ones...' 

 The girl struck a strong blow, turning at the hips. Blood splatter onto the whitewall as a large 
irregular spot of crimson. 

 'I cannot stand small children.' Said short hair, while with a swift movement flicked the blood from 
the sword. 

 'Do not just stand there, Mistle.' Scarlet scarf urged her. 'To the horses! We have to blow! This is a 
Nilfgaard settlement, we have no friends here!' 


 The Rats quickly ran out of the inn. Ciri did not know what to do, but had no time to reflect, Mistle, 
the short haired one, pushed her towards the door. 

 Before the inn, among the remains of the gnawed bones and jars, were the corpses of the Nissir 
guarding the entrance. From the village came running farmers with spears, but in light of the Rats 
emerging, they immediately disappeared among the huts. 

 'Do you know how to ride?' Mistle shouted at Ciri. 

 'Yes...' 

 'The come, grab one and gallop! There is a reward for our heads in this Nilfgaardian village! 
They're all reaching for bows and spears! Ride behind Giselher! By the middle of the street! And stay 
away from the huts!' 

 Ciri flew over the low railing, grabbing the reins of one of the trappers horses, jumped into the 
saddle then slammed the rump of the horse with the flat of her sword, which she had not let go off. 
She went into a fast gallop ahead of Kayleigh and the colourful elf, who was called Iskra The Rats 
rushed in the direction of the mill. She saw out of the darkness of a house, jump a man with a 
crossbow, pointed at Giselher's back. 

 'Stop him!' She heard from the rear. 'Stop him, girl!' 

 Ciri leaned in the saddle, jerking the reins and forcing her galloping horse to change direction, 
raising her sword. The man with the crossbow turning at the last second, she saw his face furrow in 
fear. Her hand hesitated only a moment, which was enough for her gallop to bring her alongside him. 
She heard the sound of the string releasing, the horse screamed, dropped to its haunches and reared. 
Ciri jumped, pulling her feet from the stirrups, landing lightly and dropping into a squat. Iskra, who 
was approaching, launched from the saddle a heavy blow, cutting down the crossbowman. The 
crossbowman fell to his knees, leaned forward and fell onto his face into a puddle, splashing mud. The 
wounded horse snorted and flung to the side, finally running between the huts, kicking hard. 

 'You idiot!' Yelled the elf, as she rode past Ciri. 'You bloody idiot' 

 'Jump on!' Kayleigh shouted, approaching her. Ciri ran, grabbed the hand he offered to her. The 
momentum pulled at her shoulder joint until it cracked, but she managed to jump on the horse, 
clinging to the back of the blond haired Rat. They went at a gallop past Iskra. The elf turned, chasing 
down another crossbowman, who threw down his weapon and ran towards the barn doors. Iskra 
reached him effortlessly. Ciri turned away. She heard the crossbowman scream cut short, like a wild 
beast. 

 Mistle caught up with them pulling along a saddled horse. She shouted something, Ciri could not 
understand the words, but she realised on the fly. She released Kayleigh's back and jumped back to 
the ground, ran to the saddled horse which was getting dangerously close to the huts. Mistle threw her 
the reins, looked up and shouted a warning. Ciri turned just in time to perform a half pirouette which 
helped her avoid the treacherous onslaught of a spear wielded by a stocky farmer who had emerged 
from a pigsty. 

 What happened next haunted her dreams for a long time. She remembered everything, every 
movement. The half pirouette that saved her from the tip of the spear, had set her in the ideal position. 
The spearman, however, was leaning forward to heavily, was unable to either jump away or shield 
himself as he held the spear with both hands. Ciri struck a blow, turning in an opposite half pirouette. 
For a moment she saw his lips open to scream in his face that was covered by a few days growth of 
beard. She saw on his long bald forehead the line where his cap or hat protected against a tan. And 
then everything she saw, was obscured by the fountain of blood. 

 Still holding the horse by the reins, the horse broke into a ghoulish squeal, and turning knocked her 
to her knees. Ciri did not let go of the reins. The wounded man screamed in a death rattle, was thrown 
convulsively into the straw and manure where blood flowed from him like a pig. Ciri felt bile rising to 
her throat. 

 Next to her nailed to her horse was Iskra. The elf seized the reins and tugged, forcing Ciri, who was 
still clutching the reins, back to her feet. 

 'Into the saddle!' She screamed 'And run!' 


 Ciri contained her nausea and jumped into the saddle. On the sword, which she still held in her 
hand was blood. She barely mastered the desire to throw the weapon as far away from herself as 
possible. 

 Mistle appeared from among the huts, chasing two people. One managed to escape by jumping a 
fence; the second was struck, feel to his knees and clutched his head in both hands. 

 Both Ciri, and the elf started off at a gallop, but after a moment stopped. Returning from the mill 
was Giselher with the other Rats. Behind them shouting encouragingly to each other was an armed 
group of farmers. 

 'Follow us!' cried Giselher passing them at a gallop. 'Follow us, Mistle! To the river!' 

 Mistle, leaning to one side, tugged the reins, turned her horse and was soon galloping behind him, 
jumping a low fence. Ciri put her face into the mane of her horse and followed. Iskra galloped along 
beside her. The momentum of the race had messed her beautiful black hair, revealing a small, pointed 
ear adorned with a filigree earring. 

 The man that Mistle had wounded was still kneeling in the middle of the road, swaying and 
clutched his bleeding head with both hands. Iskra turned around, rode up to him and struck with her 
sword from above with all her might. The wounded man screamed. Ciri saw severed fingers leap to 
the side like long cut chips, then fall to the ground like fat white worms. 

 With great effort, she managed not to vomit. 

 Before the hole in the palisade, waiting, were Mistle and Kayleigh, the rest of the Rats were already 
far ahead. All four went into a sharp, extended gallop, next to the river, the spraying water reached 
well above their horses' heads. Bent over, cheeks snuggled into the manes of their horses they crossed 
onto the sandy rocks , then ran on through a meadow covered with lupines. Iskra, having the best 
horse, was ahead of them. 

 They entered a forest, in the humid darkness between the trunks of the beeches. They caught up to 
Giselher and the others, but stopped for only a moment. They crossed the forest and entered a moors, 
then enter a gallop again. Ciri and Kayleigh soon began to lag behind the others, the trapper mounts 
were unable to keep the pace with the other Rats mounts. Ciri had another problem: it was a big horse 
and her feet barely reached the stirrups and during the gallop she was unable to adjust them. She knew 
how to ride without stirrups no worse than with stirrups, but knew at this pace she could not sustain a 
gallop for long. 

 Fortunately, after a few minutes Giselher slowed and stopped , allowing her and Kayleigh to join 
the group. Ciri came at a trot. She still could not adjust the strap on the stirrups. Without slowing she 
shifted her right leg over and sat down side saddle on the horse. 

 Mistle, seeing the position the girl was riding in burst into laughter. 

 'See, Giselher? Not only is she an acrobat, but also a mountebank! Hey, Kayleigh, where did you 
get this devil?' 

 Iskra, stopped her beautiful chestnut mare, still dry and eager to continue came nearer, pushing into 
the grey mare Ciri rode. Her horse snorted and stepped back, tossing its head. Ciri pulled on the reins 
and leant in the saddle. 

 'Do you know why you are still alive, moron?' the elf growled, pushing aside the hair from her 
forehead. 'That farmer that respected your life so mercifully dropped the hammer early and hit the 
horse instead of you. Otherwise you would now have a bolt sticking out of your back! Why are you 
wearing that sword?' 

 'Leave her alone, Iskra' Mistle said, stroking sweat from the neck of her mount. 'Giselher, we need 
to slow down, the pace is killing the horses! No one is chasing us' 

 'I want to cross the Velda as soon as possible.' Said Giselher. "We can rest across the river. 
Kayleigh, how is your horse?' 

 'It'll endure. It is a thoroughbred, not meant for racing, but it's a strong beast/' 

 'Well, let's run.' 

 'One moment,' said Iskra. 'What about this brat?' 

 Giselher looked back, adjusted his scarlet scarf and fixed his gaze on Ciri. His face, his expression, 
reminded her a little of Kayleigh – the same angry grimace of the lips, the same squinting eyes and the 


protruding lower jaw. But he was older than the blond haired Rat – bluish shadows on his cheeks 
testified that he shaved regularly already. 

 'True,' he said sharply. 'What about you, lass?' 

 Ciri lowered her head. 

 'She helped.' Said Kayleigh. 'It it were not for her, that nasty trapper would have nailed me to the 
post...' 

 'The villagers,' added Mistle 'saw her running away with us. She slashed one, I doubt he survived. 
Those Nilfgaardians are farmers. If the girls falls into their hands, they'll kill her. We cannot leave 
her.' 

 Iskra snorted angrily, but Giselher raised his hand. 

 'Let us cross the Velda,' he decided. 'Then we'll see. Come, sit on the horse as you should, girl. If 
you fall, we will not see. Understand?' 

 Ciri nodded readily. 

 

*** 

 

 'Tell me, girl who are you? Where are you from? What is your name? Why do you travel under 
escort?' 

 Ciri bowed her head. During the gallop she had plenty of time to try and invent a story. She had 
invented a few. But the leader of the Rats did not look like someone who believed just anything. 

 'Come on,' urged Giselher. 'You have ridden with us a few hours. You have listened to us, but I 
have not had a chance to know the sound of your voice. Are you mute?' 

 The fire shot up in a cloud of sparks and flames, flooding the ruined shepherd's hut with a wave of 
golden light. As if obeying a command of Giselher's, the fire lit up of the questioned party making it 
easier to discover if it held lies or falsehood. 

 But I cannot tell them the truth. Ciri thought desperately. They are thieves. Bandits. If they found 
out what the Nilfgaardians want me, that the Traps caught me for a reward, they may want the reward 
themselves. Besides, the truth is too incredible I do not even believe it. 

 'We saved you from the village,' the leader of the bandits slowly continued. 'We brought you here 
to one of our hideouts. Gave you food. You are sitting here by our fire. So tell me who you are!' 

 'Leave her alone.' Mistle said suddenly. 'When I look at you, Giselher, I'm suddenly reminded of 
the Nissir, or the Trappers or one of those bastard Nilfgaardians. I feel like I am in an interrogation, 
tied to a rack in the dungeon.' 

 'Mistle is right,' said the blond wearing the sheepskin jacket. Ciri twitched upon hearing his accent. 
'It is clear that the girl does not want to say who she is and she is entitled to that. When I joined you, I 
also did not talk much. I did not want to mention I was one of those bastard Nilfgaardians...' 

 'No shit, Reef.' Giselher waved his hand. 'With you it was different. And you Mistle, you 
exaggerate. There is no interrogation. I want to hear who she is and from where she is from. Once I've 
heard it I'll show her the way home and that's it. How can I do that if I do not know...' 

 'You do not know anything.' Mistle looked back. 'Even if she has a home, which I doubt. The 
trappers grabbed her on the road because she was alone. That's typical of these cowards. If she is 
forced to go, she would not survive alone in the mountains. Wolves would tear her apart or she'd die 
of hunger.' 

 'So, what do we do with her?' the broad shouldered one said with a young sounding voice, while 
stirring the wood in the fire with a stick. 'Do we leave her near a village?' 

 'Great idea, Asse.' Mistle sneered, 'Do you know the farmers? With the lack of hands to do the 
work now. Maybe they can get the girl to graze cattle, breaking her leg so she cannot escape. In the 
evening she will be treated like a nobody, and therefore common property. And you know how she'll 
pay for the roof over her head. And in the spring will have fevers after recently giving birth to 
someone's bastard in a pigsty.' 

 'If we leave her the horse and the sword,' Giselher drawled slowly, still looking at Ciri. 'I would 
not want to be in the shoes of the farmer who wanted to break her leg. Or make a bastard. You saw the 
dance that she danced in the inn with the trapper whose throat Mistle cut. He was slashing air and she 


danced as if nothing was happening... Ha, I do not care about her name or her family, but would be 
happy to know where she learned these tricks...' 

 'Tricks will not save her,' Iskra said suddenly, who had been busy sharpening her sword. 'She can 
only dance. To survive she must learn to kill, and that she does not know.' 

 'I think she knows.' Kayleigh smiled. 'When in that village she ripped open the neck of that farmer, 
the blood flew out half a fathom...' 

 'And at the sight of it she nearly fainted.' Snorted the elf. 

 'Because she is still a kid.' Mistle interjected. 'I can imagine who she is and where she learned 
these tricks. I've seen people like her before. She's a dancer or acrobat with a travelling troupe.' 

 'And since when,' Iskra snorted again 'do we care about dancers and acrobats? Damn, midnight is 
approaching, sleep is overcoming me. Let's stop with the empty chatter. We have to sleep and rest, 
tomorrow at dusk we will be in Forge. You have not forgotten that it was the mayor who gave the 
Nissir, Kayleigh. The whole village will see how the night takes on a red face. And the girl? She can 
have the horse and sword, both were honestly earned. Give her some food and some money. For 
helping to save Kayleigh. Let her go where she wants, let her care for herself...' 

 'All right,' Ciri said, pursing her lips and rising. There was silence broken only by the crackling 
fire. The Rats looked at her curiously, waiting. 

 'All right.' She repeated, amazed at the sound of her voice which sounded so alien. 'I do not need 
you, I have not asked for anything... And I do not want to be with you! I'll leave...' 

 'So you're not mute.' Giselher said sombrely. 'You can speak, even cheeky.' 

 'Look at her eyes.' Iskra snapped. 'Look how she is holding her head. Bird of prey. Hawk!' 

 'You want to leave.' Said Kayleigh 'But where, do you know?' 

 'What do you care?' Ciri screamed, her eyes flashing a brilliant green. 'Do I ask you, where you 
go? I don't care! I do not need you at all! I can... I can handle it! Alone!' 

 'Alone?' Mistle repeated, smiling strangely. Ciri was silent, bowing her head. The Rats were also 
silent. 

 'It's night.' Giselher finally said. 'Do not ride at night. Do not ride alone, girl. He who is alone, dies 
alone. There, near the horses, are blankets and furs. Take some. Nights are cold in the mountains. 
Why are you looking at me with those green lanterns? Prepare a bed and sleep. You have to rest.' 

 After a moment of reflection, Ciri obeyed. When she returned, carrying a blanket and furs the Rats 
were no longer sitting around the fire. They stood in a semicircle, and the brightness of the fire flared 
in their eyes. 

 'We are the Border Rats.' Giselher said proudly. 'Smelling the spoils of loot miles away. And there 
is nothing we are not able to crack. We are the Rats. Come here, girl.' 

 She obeyed. 

 'You have nothing.' Giselher said, handing her a silver studded belt. 'Accept this.' 

 'You have nothing and not one.' Said Mistle, throwing over her shoulders with a smile, a green 
satin doublet and a plain weave blouse. 

 'You have nothing.' Said Kayleigh and his gift to her was a small dagger in a sheath studded with 
precious stones. 'You are alone.' 

 'You have no one.' Asse repeated after giving Ciri a decorative baldric. 

 'You have no family.' Said Reef in his Nilfgaardian accent, handing her a pair of soft skin gloves. 
'You have no one nearby...' 

 ' Everywhere you are a stranger.' Finished Iskra with seeming carelessness, and quickly and 
unceremoniously placed a beret with turkey feathers on her head. 'An Outsider everywhere and 
always different. How shall we call you, little hawk?' 

 Ciri looked into her eyes. 

 'Gvalch'ca.' 

 The elf laughed. 

 'Once you start to speak, you speak in multiple languages, little hawk! Very good. You will carry 
the name from the Elder People, a name that you yourself have chosen. You will be called Falka.' 

 

*** 


 

 Falka. 

 She could not sleep. Horses shuffled and neighed in the dark, the wind whispered through the tops 
of the pines. The sky was covered with starts. With great clarity shone the Eye, her faithful guide for 
many days while in the wilderness of the desert. The Eye pointed west. But Ciri was not sure if that 
was right. She was not sure of anything. 

 She could not sleep even though for the first time in many days she felt safe. She was no longer 
alone. She had placed the bed of blankets and furs in a corner, away from the Rats, who slept on the 
clay floor of the ruined hut, by the warm fire. She was away from them but still felt a closeness and 
presence. She was not alone. 

 She heard quiet footsteps. 

 'Do not be afraid.' Said Kayleigh. 'I will not tell,' whispered the blond hair Rat, while he crouched 
beside her 'I will not tell them anything about the reward promised for you by the governor of 
Amarillo. There in the tavern you saved my life. I will reward you. With a beautiful thing. Right now.' 

 He lay beside her, slowly and carefully. Ciri tried to get up but Kayleigh forced her to lie down with 
a movement that was not violent, but strong and firm. He put a finger gently on her lips. It was not 
necessary. Ciri was paralysed with fear and her throat was painfully tight and dry and a cry could not 
have escaped, even though she wanted it. But it did not. The silence and darkness were better. Safer. 
More intimate. Hiding her fear and shame. She moaned. 

 'Be quiet, little one.' Kayleigh whispered, slowly untying her shirt. Slowly and smoothly he slid the 
fabric down off of her shoulders and pulled the shirt above her waist. 'Do not be afraid. You'll see 
how pleasant this is.' 

 Ciri shivered at the touch of his fingers, dry, hard and rough. She lay motionless, stretched taunt 
and full of fear and an overwhelming disgust, that sent heat waves to her temples and cheeks. 
Kayleigh slipped her left arm under his head and drew her closer to himself, trying to remove her 
hands that convulsively pulled the bottom of her shirt down in vain. She began to tremble. 

 In the darkness around her she suddenly felt a movement; she felt a jolt and the sound of a kick. 

 'Have you gone mad, Mistle?' Barked Kayleigh, sitting up a little. 

 'Leave her alone, you swine.' 

 'Piss off. Go to sleep.' 

 'I said leave her alone.' 

 'Does this seem unwelcome? Did she yell or stir? I just wanted to comfort her in her sleep. Don't 
interrupt.' 

 'Get out of here or I'll make you.' 

 Ciri heard the screech of a sword in its scabbard. 

 'I'm not kidding,' Mistle repeated, looming in the darkness above them. 'Go over to the others. 
Now!' 

 Kayleigh sat up, cursing. Her got up without saying a word and went quickly. 

 Ciri felt tears running down her cheeks, faster and faster, moving like worms crawling into her hair 
beside her ears. Mistle lay down beside her and covered her skin diligently. But did not close the shirt, 
leaving it open as it was. Ciri started shaking again. 

 'Quiet, Falka. Everything is fine.' 

 Mistle was warm and smelled of cattle and smoke. Her hand, unlike Kayleigh's hand was more 
delicate, more tender. More enjoyable. But the contact was making Ciri tense again, her body 
stiffened with fear and disgust, she squeezed her jaw shut. Mistle stuck to her, holding her protectively 
and whispering soothing words, but also her soft hand was crawling tireless like a snail, warm, calm, 
confident, determined, aware of it route and purpose. Ciri felt the grip of fear and disgust open up and 
release their prey, she felt the pressure release and fell down, down, deeper, into a warm and humid 
swamp of resigned submission. 

 She moaned dully, desperately. Mistle breath scorched her neck, velvet moist lips kissed her 
shoulder, collarbone and then very slowly moved lower. 

 Ciri, moaned again. 


 'Hush, little hawk.' Mistle whispered, gently pushing her arm under her head. 'You will not be 
alone. Not anymore.' 

 

*** 

 

 Ciri awoke at dawn. She slipped from under the fur and slowly and carefully, as to not wake Mistle, 
who slept with parted lip and her eyes hidden by her forearm. Her forearm had goosebumps. Ciri 
carefully covered the girl. After a moment's hesitation she leaned forward and gently kissed her 
cropped spiky hair. Mistle purred in her sleep. Ciri wiped a tear from her cheek. 

 She was no longer alone. 

 The rest of the Rats were also asleep, one was snoring loudly, while another let lose a fart. Iskra 
was lying with her hand across Giselher's chest, lush hair scattered in disarray. The horses snorted and 
kicked, a woodpecker was at the trunk of a pine hammering it with short blows. 

 Ciri ran to the river. She washed for a long time, shivering with cold. She washed with sharp 
movements of her hands, trying to remove what could not be removed. Tears rolled down her cheeks. 

 Falka. 

 The water foamed and hissed onto the rocks, sailing into the distance, in fog. 

 Everything flowed into the distance. Into the fog. 

 Everything. 

 

*** 

 

 They were outcasts. They were a strange jumble created by war, misery and contempt. War, misery 
and contempt joined them and spat them out, like a swollen river spits out and deposits on beaches 
black polished stones and pieces of wood. 

 Kayleigh had woken up in smoke, fire and blood in a plundered castle lying between the corpses of 
his adoptive parents and siblings. Crawling among the corpses in the courtyard was Reef. Reef was a 
solider of the punitive expedition, which Emperor Emhyr van Emreis sent to quell the insurgency in 
Ebbing. He was one of those who had conquered and plundered the castle after a two day siege. 
Having conquered the castle, his comrades abandoned Reef, although Reef was still alive. But care of 
the wounded had never been customary in the Nilfgaard special forces. 

 At first Kayleigh wanted to finish off Reef. But Kayleigh did not want to be alone. And Reef and 
Kayleigh were only sixteen. 

 Together they licked their wounds. Together they killed and robbed a tack collector; together they 
gave away the beer to an inn, and then riding through the village on stolen horses, throwing away the 
rest of the stolen money, dying of laughter the whole time. 

 Together they fled the pursuit and Nilfgaardian Nissir patrols. 

 Giselher deserted the army. Perhaps it was the army of the lord of Geso who had allied with the 
rebels from Ebbing. Probably. Giselher was not sure where he had been dragged from and enlisted. He 
had been drunk. Once he sobered up and got his first drill sergeant, he escaped. At first, he wandered 
alone, but when the Nilfgaard destroyed the confederation of rebels, the forest was full of deserters 
and fugitives. The fugitives soon joined into bands. Giselher joined one of them. 

 The band plundered and burned villages, attacking caravans and transports that were running in 
wild flight from the Nilfgaardian cavalry squadrons. During one of these flights, the band ran to 
escape into the woods but ran into Elves and found death and destruction. The death was in the form 
of invisible hissing gray feathered arrows from all sides. One shot pierced through his shoulder and 
pinned him to a tree. The one who pulled the arrow the next morning and took care of the wound was 
Aenyeweddien. 

 Giselher never learned why the elves sent Aenyeweddien into exile, for what crime she had been 
condemned to death. Because for a free elf, death was being alone in the narrow stretch of no man's 
land separating the humans from the free Elder People. A lonely elf will die, if they cannot find a 
companion. 


 Aenyeweddien had found a companion. Her name, in free translation was "Child of Fire", was too 
complicated and poetic for Giselher. He called her Spark. 

 Mistle came from a wealthy and noble family of Thurn manor, north of Maecht. His father was a 
vassal of Prince Rudiger, he joined the rebel army, let himself get killed and disappeared without a 
trace. When the population of Thurn fled the city before the news of the impending punitive 
expedition the notorious Peacekeepers of Gemmer, Mistle's family also fled, but lost Mistle in the 
panic that gripped the crowd. A decorated and delicate lady, who from early childhood had been 
carried around in a sedan chair, was unable to keep up with the fugitives. After three days of 
wandering alone she fell into the clutches of slave hunters who followed the Nilfgaardians. A girl 
under seventeen years was worth a lot. If she was intact. The hunters did not touch Mistle, after 
checking earlier that she was intact. After that check, Mistle sobbed all night. 

 In the valley of Velda, the caravan of hunters was attacked and destroyed by a band of Nilfgaardian 
deserters. They killed all the hunters and male slaves. They spared only the girls. The girls did not 
know why they had been spared. The ignorance did not last long. 

 Mistle was the only one who survived. She was pulled from the ditch, where she was thrown, 
naked, covered in bruises, filth, mud and blood. She was saved by Asse, the son of a village 
blacksmith, who had followed the Nilfgaardians for three days, mad with desire for revenge for what 
the marauders had done with his father, mother and sisters, which he had witness while hiding among 
some reeds. 

 They all met one day during the celebrations of Lamas, the Harvest Festival, in one of the villages 
of Geso. War and poverty had not then devastated the country's high veld. Farmers celebrated as 
tradition dictated the beginning of the crescent moon, with dancing and noisy entertainment. 

 They did not have to search for too long for each other in the crowd. They differed a lot from them. 
They had many things in common. They shared a taste for noisy, colourful, imaginative costumes, 
stolen trinkets, beautiful horses and swords which they did not remove even to dance. They were 
distinguished by their arrogance and haughtiness, their self-confidence and mocking chatter and their 
violence. 

 And their hatred. 

 They were children of the times of contempt. And for others they only held contempt. What 
counted to them was strength. Efficiency in arms, which they quickly acquired on the highways. Fast 
horses and sharp swords. 

 They became comrades. Companions. Friends. Because those who are alone, shall die of famine, 
sword, arrow, the stakes of the peasants, on the scaffold or by fire. Whoever is alone dies: stabbed, 
beaten, kicked, defiled, like a toy passed from hand to hand. 

 They met at the Harvest Festival. The sombre, dark, skinny Giselher. Kayleigh, thin, long hair, with 
evil eyes and mouth arranged in a hideous face. Reef, who still spoke with a Nilfgaardian accent. 
Mistle, tall, long legged, with straw coloured hair cut so short that it was stiff as a brush. Spark, large 
colourful eyes, slender, and light in the dance but fast and deadly in battle, with thin lips and small 
elvish teeth. Asse, broad shouldered, with a white moustache and a twisted beard. 

 Giselher became the leader. They adopted the name the Rats. Someone had called them that once 
and they loved it. 

 They robbed and killed, and their cruelty became proverbial. 

 At first, the governor of Nilfgaard underestimated them. They were sure that, like the other bands, 
they would soon fall victim to the angry peasants or would destroy and kill each other, when their 
greed for the stored booty triumphed over the bandit solidarity. The governor was right in regards to 
the other gangs, but they were wrong about the Rats. Because the Rats, children of contempt, despised 
the spoils. They attacked, robbed and killed for fun and seized shipments of military horses, cattle, 
grain, straw, salt, tar and cloth which they distributed in villages. With handfuls of gold and silver to 
pay tailors and craftsmen for things they loved above all else: weapons, clothes and ornaments. Those 
they paid well, who sheltered and hid them, even when flogged but the Nissir would not betray the 
hiding places and routes of the Rats. 

 The governors offered a large reward, and at first there were those that rejoiced at the prospect of 
Nilfgaardian gold. But at night, the homes of the informers became engulfed in flames and as the fire 


died down from the smoke rode ghostly riders with swords. The Rats attacked as rats. In silence, 
betrayal and cruelty. Rats loved to kill. 

 The governors turned to other methods that had worked with other bands; sometimes they tried to 
introduce a traitor among the Rats. They were unsuccessful. The Rats did not accept anyone. They 
were a compact and fraternal six made by the time of contempt and they did not want strangers. They 
despised them. 

 Until the day when a girl appeared, ashen haired, tight-lipped and agile as an acrobat, who knew 
nothing about the Rats. 

 Except she was like each of them. She was alone and full of sadness, sadness for what had been 
stolen from her in this time of contempt. 

 And in times of contempt, one who is alone must die. 

 Giselher, Kayleigh, Reef, Iskra, Mistle, Asse and Falka. 

 The governor of Amarillo was astonished beyond measure when he was told that there were now 
seven Rats. 

 

*** 

 

 'Seven?' The surprised governor of Amarillo said, looking at the soldier in disbelief. 'There were 
seven, not six? Are you sure?' 

 'I wish I was as healthy as I was sure.' The sole surviving solider of the massacre said faintly. 

 His desire was quite natural – the head and half of the soldier's face was covered by a dirty bandage 
and covered in blood. The governor, who had been in more than one battle, knew that the soldier had 
been hit at the back from above – the end of the blade, went from left to right, precise, requiring skill 
and speed, directed at the right ear and cheek, in places not protected by a helmet or iron collar. 

 'Give me your account.' 

 'We were walking along the Velda in the direction of Thurn.' Started the soldier. 'The order was to 
save one of the convoys being transported by Lord Evertsen which was heading south. We were 
attacked by the fallen bridge when we were crossing the river. One cart was stuck, then we had to use 
horses from the second to pull it out. The rest of the convoy went ahead; I was left with five men and 
with the bailiff. And we were jumped. The bailiff, before he was killed, had time to shout that these 
were the Rats and then they had him around the throat... They overthrew us all. When I saw this...' 

 'When you saw him,' the governor scowled 'You put your heels to your horses. But you were too 
late to save his skin.' 

 'She caught up with me' The soldier bowed his head 'the seventh; I hadn't seen her at first. A girl. 
Almost a kid. I guess she was left at the back of the Rats, because she was young and 
inexperienced...' 

 A visitor to the governor emerged from the darkness in which had been sitting. 

 'Was it a girl?' He asked. 'What was she like?' 

 'Like all of them. Painted up like an elf, colourfully like a parrot, dressed in bright velvets and 
brocades, with a hat with a feather.' 

 'Blonde?' 

 'I think so, sir. When I saw her, the horse she was riding was going fast, thinking that one of her 
companions was about to be made into mincemeat and she would make them pay blood for blood... I 
came in from the right and cut at her.. How she did it I don't know. But I missed her. It was if the 
blow had gone through a ghost or spirit... I do not know how the devil... As though I was stopped, 
she got in behind me. Straight in the nose... Sir, I was at Sodden in Aldersberg. And now from that 
girl I have a souvenir on my face for life..' 

 'Be glad that you are alive,' snorted the governor, looking at his guest. 'And be glad that you were 
wounded when you recovered consciousness. Now you will become a hero. If you had avoided the 
fight, if you had no mementos on your face when reporting the loss of cargo and horses, you soon 
would have found yourself on the gallows. Well, march on. To the hospital.' 

 The soldier left. The governor turned towards the visitor. 


 'You see, sir coroner, that service here is not easy, I have no peace, I have my hands full of work. 
You there, in the capital, you think the provinces are all horsefly, beer, wenches and bribe taking 
officials. You never think to send more people or dogs, only commands – give, take, find. Putting 
everyone one alert, running from morning to night... and here our heads are bursting with our own 
problems. Five or six bands like the Rats prowling about. True the Rats are the worst, but not a day 
passes...' 

 'Enough, enough.' Stefan Skellen pursed his lips. 'I know why you serve you laminations, 
governor. But it is in vain. You are not to abandon your orders. Rats or no Rats, bands or no bands, 
you have to keep up the search. By every means within reach, until I say enough. This is an order 
from the Emperor.' 

 'We have been looking for three weeks.' The governor scowled. 'Not knowing, in the very least, 
who or what we are looking for, a spook, ghost, or a needle in a haystack. And what are the results? A 
few of my men have disappeared without a trace, likely killed by rebels or a vagrant. I'll say it again, 
coroner, if we have not found your girl, we will not find her. Even if she was here, which I doubt. 
Unless...' 

 The governor stopped, pondered, looking askance at the coroner. 

 'That girl... The seventh that rides with the Rats.' the Owl dismissively waved his hand, trying to 
make his gesture come out convincingly. 

 'No, Governor. Do not look for easy solutions. The girl described or any other girl adorned with 
brocade is surely, not the girl we want. It's definitely not her. Continue the search. That is an order.' 

 The governor murmured, looking out the window. 

 'And with that band,' he added with a seemingly indifferent voice, Emperor Emhyr's coroner, 
Stefan Skellen called The Owl 'with these Rats or whatever they are called... Regain order, governor. 
In the provinces the order must prevail. Get to work. Capture and hang them, without formalities or 
ceremonies. All of them.' 

 'Easy to say.' Muttered the governor. 'But I will do what is in my power. Assure the Emperor. But I 
think this seventh girl from the Rats is worth keeping alive, however, just to be sure...' 

 'No' Interrupted the Owl, taking care that his voice did not betray anything. 'No, exceptions, hang 
them all. All seven. I do not want to hear any more about them. I do not want to hear another word.' 