Chapter Two 

 

Near the crossroads, right where the forest ended, nine poles were erected. A carriage wheel was 
attached to each. Above the wheels, a flock of ravens and crows picked and shredded corpses tied to 
the rims. The height of poles and the number of birds made it impossible to tell for sure who the 
remains belonged to, but they were undoubtedly dead. There was no other possibility. 

Ciri turned her head away from the sight and wrinkled her nose. The wind was blowing from the 
direction of the poles, so the nauseating stench of the rotting corpses was sprawling over the 
crossroads. 

'Splendid decoration,' Yennefer bent in the saddle and spit onto the ground, temporarily forgetting 
that not so long ago she had scolded Ciri for doing just that. 'Colourful and smelling of roses. But why 
here, at the edge of the forest? Usually such things are placed right before the city walls. Am I not 
right, my good men?' 

'It's the Squirrels, my lady,' explained one of the travelling merchants, halting his horse. 'Elves. 
Up there, on the poles. That's why they're placed here. As a warning for other Squirrels.' 

'Does this mean,' the sorceress glanced at him, 'that every Scoia'tael caught alive is brought 
here...' 

'Elves, my lady, rarely let themselves be captured alive,' the merchant interrupted. 'And even when 
warriors manage to catch one, they're taken to a town, since that's where resident non-humans dwell. 
But an elf struck in a battle is brought to the crossroads and strapped to a pole. Often, they're brought 
from afar, all rotten and stinky...' 

'And to think,' muttered Yennefer, 'that we were forbidden from practicing necromancy on account 
of respect for the majesty of death and remains deserving reverence, peace, ceremonial burial...' 

'What do you mean, my lady?' 

'Never mind. Let us not waste time, Ciri; better to leave this place. Pfeh, I feel like I've already 
been contaminated by that stench.' 

'Me too, eueueee!' said Ciri, overtaking merchant's wagon. 'Let's ride at a gallop, okay?' 

'Fine... Ciri! I meant a gallop, not a frenzy!' 

 

*** 

 

They soon approached a city: huge, surrounded by walls, bristling with spike-shaped towers. Sea 
could be seen behind it, blue-green, sparkling in the morning sun, dotted with white spots of sails. Ciri 
stopped her horse at the edge of the sandy cliff, stood on stirrups and greedily inhaled the wind and 
the smell. 

'Gors Velen,' said Yennefer, riding up to her. 'We've finally arrived. Let's go back on the road.' 

They took off at a gallop again, leaving behind few wagons and wood-carrying pedestrians. Once 
they were alone, the sorceress slowed down and nodded at Ciri to do the same. 

'Come,' she said. 'Closer. Take the reins and lead my horse. I'll need both hands.' 

'What for?' 

'Take the reins, I said.' 


Yennefer took out a silvery mirror, wiped it and quietly murmured a spell. The mirror slipped out 
of her hands and floated above stallion's neck, right across her face. 

Ciri sighed in admiration; licked her lips. 

The sorceress took off her bonnet and for a moment energetically combed her hair. Ciri was silent. 
She knew that Yennefer was not to be disturbed when making her hair. The beautiful and seemingly 
incidental disorder of her curly, lush locks needed a lot of work and attention. 

The sorceress reached to the packs again, then put on diamond earrings and bracelets. She took the 
scarf off and unbuttoned her shirt, exposing neck and the black necklace adorned with obsidian star. 

'Ha!' Ciri finally lost patience. 'I know why you're doing this! You want to look pretty, because 
we're visiting a city! Am I right?' 

'You are.' 

'What about me?' 

'What about you?' 

'I want to look pretty too! I will make my hair...' 

'Put your bonnet back on,' ordered Yennefer harshly, still regarding her reflection. 'Back where it 
was. Cover your hair.' 

Ciri hissed angrily but obeyed. She had long since learned to read various tones of sorceress' voice. 
She knew when to try arguing and when to stay silent. 

Yennefer, having finished arranging the curls on her forehead, retrieved from her pack a small 
green-stained glass jar. 

'Ciri,' she said in a softer tone. 'It's a secret journey we're on. And this journey hasn't ended yet. 
Which is why you have to hide your hair under the bonnet. There men before every gate who are 
being paid for being watchful of all new-comers. Do you understand?' 

'No,' Ciri retorted tactlessly, pulling the reins of the raven stallion. 'You decked yourself out so 
much that those observers from before the gates will have their eyes pop out of the sockets! Some 
secrecy!' 

'The city we're heading to,' Yennefer smiled, 'is Gors Velen. I don't need to camouflage myself in 
Gors Velen, rather the opposite. With you, it's another matter. You are not to be remembered by 
anybody.' 

'Those who will be gazing at you are bound to notice me as well!' 

The sorceress uncorked the jar which smelled of lilac and gooseberry. She dipped her finger in the 
liquid and rubbed some of it under her eyes. 

'I doubt,' she said, still smiling mysteriously, 'that anyone's going to notice you.' 

 

*** 

 

A long line of riders and wagons stood before the bridge and travellers were crowding before the 
gates waiting for their turn. Ciri grumbled at the perspective of a long wait. Yennefer, however, 
straightened herself in the saddle and continued trotting, her gaze high above the heads of the 
travellers – who quickly stepped aside and made a way, not sparing the shaft of spears on the reluctant 
ones. 

'This way, this way, honourable lady!' called one of the guards, staring at Yennefer with a 
reddened face. 'This way, please! Move aside! Move aside, plebes!' 

The commander of the guards emerged from the garrison grumpy and angry, but once he caught 
sight of Yennefer he brightened up, opened widely his eyes and mouth, and bowed. 

'I humbly welcome you in Gors Velen, my lady,' he stuttered, straightening and still staring. 'At 
your service... How can I help you, madam? Perhaps you need an escort? A guide? Shall I call 
somebody?' 

'There's no need.' Yenenfer looked down at him 'I won't stay for long. I'm heading to Thanedd.' 

'Naturally...' The warrior shifted weight from one leg to the other, never taking eyes off sorceress' 
face. Other guards were gazing at her as well. Ciri proudly lifted her head but quickly realized that 
nobody was looking at her. As if she were invisible. 


'Naturally...' repeated the commander. 'To Thanedd, yes... For the convent. I understand, 
naturally. Therefore I wish...' 

'Thank you,' the sorceress hurried her horse, clearly uninterested in commander's wishes. Ciri 
followed. Guards were bowing before Yennefer, not sparing the girl so much as a glance. 

'They didn't even ask for your name,' she muttered, catching up with Yennefer and carefully 
leading her mount through the mud-covered ruts. 'Nor for our destination point! Did you cast a spell 
on them?' 

'Not on them. On myself.' 

The magician turned around and Ciri gasped loudly. Yennefer's eyes were burning with a violet 
flame and her face radiated with beauty. Dazzling. Provocative. Dangerous. And unnatural. 

'The green jar!' guessed Ciri. 'What was that?' 

'Glamarye. An elixir. Or rather, an ointment for special occasions. Ciri, do you really have to ride 
into every puddle?' 

'I want to clean horse's hooves.' 

'It didn't rain for a month. This is swill and horse-piss, not water.' 

'Aha... Say, why did you use that elixir? Were you really so desperate to...' 

'This is Gors Velen,' cut Yennefer. 'The city which owes its prosperity in big part to wizards. 
Sorceresses, to be precise. You've seen how sorceresses are treated here. I didn't feel like introducing 
myself or proving who I am. I wanted it to be obvious at the first sight. When we pass that red house, 
we're turning left. Slower, Ciri. Keep your horse in check or you will run over some child.' 

'Why did we come here?' 

'I told you that already.' 

Ciri hissed, tightened her lips and prodded the horse with her heel. The mare danced, barely 
missing a coach. The driver stood up and looked like he was about to give her a piece of his mind, but 
once he saw Yennefer he sat back down and indulged in analysing his shoes. 

'Do that again,' uttered Yennefer, 'and I'll get upset. Quit acting like a juvenile lass. You're an 
embarrassment.' 

'You want to send me to some school, right? I don't want to go!' 

'Quiet. People are staring.' 

'They're staring at you, not at me! I don't want to go to no school! You promised me that we'll 
always be together, and now you want to leave me! All alone! I don't want to be alone!' 

'You won't be. There are many of your peers at this school. You will have plenty friends.' 

'I don't want friends. I want to be with you and with... I thought...' 

Yennefer turned around instantly. 

'You thought what?' 

'I thought we were going to Geralt.' Ciri looked up unashamedly. 'I know what you were thinking 
all the way. And why you were sighing at night...' 

'Enough,' hissed the sorceress and the blaze of her eyes caused Ciri to hide her face in horse's 
mane. 'You've become insolent. I would like to remind you that the time when you could resist me 
has long gone. It was your own decision. Now, you must be obedient. You will do what I say. 
Understood?' 

Ciri nodded. 

'I know what's best for you. I always do. And so, you'll listen and obey. Is that clear? Stop the 
horse. We're here.' 

'This is the school?' grumbled Ciri, eyeing the impressive exterior of the building, 'It's already...' 

'Not a word more. Get down. And show proper manners. This isn't the school; the school is in 
Aretuza, not Gors Velen. This is a bank.' 

'What do we need a bank for?' 

'Ponder it on your own. Dismount, I said. Not right into a puddle! Leave the horse, service will take 
care of it. Take off the gloves. It's not proper to enter a bank in riding gloves. Look at me. Adjust your 
bonnet and collar. Stand straight. You're not sure what to do with your hands? Then don't do 
anything!' 

Ciri sighed. 


The service, which had greeted them bowing and scraping, was made up entirely of dwarves. Ciri 
gazed at them intently. Although just as short, husky-built and bearded, they didn't resemble her friend 
Yarpen Zigrin nor his 'boys'. The servants were dull, uniformed, bland. And humble, which was the 
last thing one could say about Yarpen and his boys. 

They entered the building. The magic elixir was still working, so Yennefer's sight immediately 
caused a great stir, a lot of running, and more bowing and scraping which was cut only by the 
appearance of incredibly fat, richly dressed dwarf with white beard. 

'Honourable Yennefer!' roared the dwarf, tinkling the golden chain hanging down his neck, long 
past his white beard. 'What a surprise! And such an honour! Please, please come to the office! And 
you all stop standing and gaping! Back to work, to the counting frames! Wilfli, immediately bring to 
the office a bottle of Castel de Neuf, year... you pick which one. Be quick! Make yourself welcome, 
Yennefer. I'm truly happy to see you. You look... eh, damn, breathtaking!' 

'You too,' smiled the sorceress, 'seem to be doing all right, Giancardi.' 

'Of course. Come in, please, to the office. But no, no, ladies first. You know the way, Yennefer.' 

The office was dark and pleasantly cool; air carried the scent which Ciri recognized from the tower 
of Jarre, the scribe: the scent of ink, parchment and dust covering the oak furniture, gobelins and old 
books. 

'Sit down, please,' the banker offered a chair to Yennefer and a questioning gaze to Ciri. 'Hmm...' 

'Give her a book, Molnar,' said the sorceress, noting the look. 'She loves books. She'll sit at the 
other end of the table and won't bother us. Right, Ciri?' 

Ciri deemed it pointless to answer. 

'A book, hem, hem,' muttered the dwarf, coming up to the cupboard. 'What do we have here? Oh, 
revenue and expense ledger... No, not that. Customs duties and port charges... that won't do. Credit 
and reimbursement? No. Oh, how did it get here? Devil knows... but it might suit you. Take it, child.' 

The book was titled 'Physiologus' ; it was very old and very tattered. Ciri cautiously turned the 
cover and several pages. The content immediately caught her interest, as it was about mysterious 
monsters and beasts and full of pictures. For the next few moments she tried to share her interest 
between the book and the conversations between the dwarf and the sorceress. 

'Got any letters for me, Molnar?' 

'No.' The banker poured wine for Yennefer and himself. 'No new post. The last ones, from month 
ago, I passed to you through established means.' 

'I received them, thank you. Has anybody... shown an interest in those letters?' 

'Not in here,' smiled Molnar Giancardi. 'But you're aiming at the right board, my dear. The bank of 
Vivaldi's has confided in me about an attempt to track those letters. Their branch in Vengerberg has 
also discovered an attempt to keep track on the history of your account. One of the men in service 
turned out to be disloyal.' 

The dwarf stopped and looked at the sorceress from under the bushy eyebrows. Ciri listened 
intently. Yennefer was silent, playing with her obsidian star. 

'Vivaldi,' Molnar carried on, lowering his voice. 'Either couldn't or didn't want to start an 
investigation about this matter. The disloyal and corruptible clerk fell into the moat while drunk and 
drowned. Unfortunate accident. Pity. Too soon, too hasty...' 

'No need to cry over spilt milk,' the sorceress pouted her lips. 'I know who was interested in my 
post and account, Vivaldi's investigation wouldn't have brought a new light.' 

'If you say so...' Giancardi scratched his beard. 'You're heading to Thanedd, Yennefer? For that 
huge convent of the wizards?' 

'Indeed.' 

'To decide on the fate of the world?' 

'Let's not exaggerate.' 

'There are many rumours around,' the dwarf said dryly. 'And many things are happening.' 

'What events, if I may inquire?' 

'Since last year,' replied Giancardi, stroking his beard. 'One can see strange changes in the fiscal 
policy... It's not in your interests, I know...' 

'Elaborate.' 


'Poll tax and winter tax were doubled, the taxes which directly fund the army pay. All merchants 
and businessmen must make additional payments to Royal Treasury: the 'tithe', a whole new tax, one 
tenth of all profits. Dwarfs, gnomes, elves and halflings pay higher poll tax. If they're involved in 
commerce or manufacture they're also burdened with the 'nonhuman' income tax, a ten out of every 
hundred. Because of all this, I have to give up to state more than sixty percent of my income. My 
bank, all branches included, pays the Four Kingdoms annually six hundred marks. Allow me to 
elaborate: it's almost three times the charge of a noble duke or count with a huge estate.' 

'Humans are not burdened with additional payment for the military?' 

'No. They only pay the poll tax and the winter tax.' 

'In other words,' nodded the sorceress. 'It is the dwarfs and other nonhumans who fund the 
campaign against Scoia'tael, taking place in the forests. I've been expecting something like this. But 
what is the relation between taxes and the convent on Thanedd?' 

'After those convents of yours,' muttered the dwarf. 'Something always happens. This time I'm 
hoping that nothing will. I'm hoping that your convent will stop things from happening. I would've 
been glad, for example, if those curious price shocks would cease.' 

'Clarify, please.' 

The dwarf leaned back in his chair and clasped fingers on his belly. 

'I've been working in this business a decent number of years,' he said. 'Long enough to be able to 
relate some currency movements with certain facts. And lately, there's been a rise in prices for gems. 
Because there's a high demand for them.' 

'Coins are being exchanged for jewels to evade losses from fluctuation and parity of the coin?' 

'That too. Gemstones also have one important quality. A pocket-size pouch of diamonds equals 
some fifty marks, while the same value in coins would weigh twenty-five pounds and need a big sack 
to carry it. It's easier to flee with a pouch than a sack. And both hands are free, which isn't pointless. 
One hand can hold a wife, while the other can be used to punch some fucker in the gob, if the need 
arises.' 

Ciri snorted quietly but Yennefer silenced her with a frown. 

'So,' she raised her head. 'Some are already preparing to escape. Where to, I wonder?' 

'Far North is most popular. Hengfors, Kovir, Poviss. Not only is it farthest from here but these 
states are neutral and have good relations with Nilfgaard.' 

'I see,' mischievous smile didn't vanish from magician's face. 'Jewels in the pocket, wife in hand 
and going up North... Isn't it too early yet? Ah, nevermind this. What else is growing more expensive, 
Molnar?' 

'Boats.' 

'What?' 

'Boats,' repeated the dwarf and grinned. 'All boat builders from the coast are busy with 
commissions from quartermasters of King Foltest's army. Quartermasters pay well and keep making 
new purchases. If you're looking to invest in something, Yennefer, then invest in boats. Golden 
business. Producing boats of reed and bark, issuing an invoice to lonboards from the best pine, sharing 
with the quartermaster...' 

'Stop teasing me, Giancardi. Explain.' 

'Those boats,' said the banker casually, staring at the ceiling, 'are transported south. To Sodden and 
Brugge, to Yaruga river. But, to my knowledge, they are not used by the fishermen. They are being 
hidden in the forests on the right bank. It's said that the army is training the boarding.' 

'Aha.' Yennefer bit her lip. 'But why are people so eager to get north? Yaruga is south.' 

'There's a justified concern,' murmured the dwarf, glancing at Ciri. 'that emperor Emhyr van 
Emreis will not be pleased by news about aforementioned boats being launched. Some believe that 
such launching might enrage Emhyr and when it happens it's safer to be far from Nilfgaardian 
border... Damn, let the harvest come quick. If anything is going to happen, it will be before harvest.' 

'Granaries will be full.' said Yenenfer slowly. 

'Indeed. Horses won't graze on barren land and fortresses with full granaries can withstand long 
siege... Weather seems promising for the crops... Yes, weather is truly great. The sun is shining, 


mushrooms await rain in vain... And Yaruga is very shallow in Dol Angra... Easy to cross. From both 
sides.' 

'Why Dol Angra?' 

'I presume,' the banker glared sharply at the sorceress while stroking his beard, 'that I can trust 
you?' 

'You always could, Giancardi. Nothing has changed.' 

'In Dol Angra,' said the dwarf slowly. 'There's Lyria and Aedirn, which are in military alliance 
with Temeria. You don't suppose that Foltest, who's buying the boats, is going to use them all for 
himself?' 

'No,' replied the magician. 'I suppose not. Thank you for your information, Molnar. Who knows, 
maybe you're right? Maybe our convent really will manage to change the fate of the world and its 
inhabitants?' 

'Don't forget the dwarves,' snorted Giancardi. 'And their banks.' 

'We won't. Speaking of which...' 

'I'm all ears.' 

'I have expenses, Molnar. And if I try to pay them from the account at Vivaldi's bank, someone 
might end up drowning again, so...' 

'Yennefer,' the dwarf interrupted. 'I owe you unlimited credit. A long time has passed since the 
pogrom in Vengerberg. Perhaps you have forgotten it, but I never will. No member of Giancardi 
family will. How much do you need?' 

'Fifteen hundred temerian orens, transferred to the Cianfanelli bank in Ellander, for the temple of 
Melitele.' 

'Done. Good transfer, donations to temples don't get taxed. Anything else?' 

'How high is the annual tuition fee in Aretuza school?' 

Ciri pricked her ears up. 

'Twelve hundred novigrad crowns,' replied Giancardi. 'There's also a matriculation for new 
students, about two hundred crowns.' 

'Damn, it's gotten higher.' 

'Every price has. Students don't lack anything, they live in Aretuza as if they were princesses. And 
half of the city earns their living from them: tailors, shoemakers, confectioners, suppliers...' 

'I'm aware of that. Transfer two thousand on the account of the school. Anonymously. With a note, 
that it's all for the matriculation and tuition fee... for one student.' 

The dwarf put down his pen, glanced at Ciri and gave her an understanding smile. Ciri, still 
pretending to be busy with the book, listened carefully. 

'Is that all, Yennefer?' 

'I'd also like to ask for three hundred novigrad crowns, in cash. I will need at least three dresses for 
the Thanedd convent.' 

'What do you need cash for? I can give you a check. For five hundred crowns. The prices of 
imported fabrics also rose hellishly much, and wool or linen is not up to your standard. And if you 
need anything - for yourself or for the soon-to-be student of Aretuza – my shops and stores are open 
for you.' 

'Thank you. What interest rate shall we agree on?' 

'You have already paid your interest,' the dwarf raised his head, 'for the whole Giancardi family, 
Yennefer, during the pogrom in Vengerberg. Let's not talk about it anymore.' 

'I don't like debts like that, Molnar.' 

'Neither do I. But I'm a merchant, a businessdwarf. I know what it means to be indebted. Allow me 
to repeat: Let's not talk about it. You may consider everything you asked for to be done. The thing you 
didn't ask for, as well.' 

Yenenfer raised her eyebrows. 

'A certain witcher, dear to you,' Giancardi chuckled, 'had recently visited the town Dorian. I've 
been informed that he had taken a loan of a hundred crowns. The usurer is working for me. I shall 
erase the debt, Yenenfer.' 

The sorceress glanced briefly at Ciri, frowning deeply. 


'Molnar,' she said coldly. 'Let sleeping dogs lie. I doubt that he still considers me dear to him, and 
if he finds out about the erased debt, he will hate me even more. You know him, how obsessed with 
honour he is. How long ago was he in Dorian?' 

'About ten days ago. He has been spotted later in Little Meadow. From there, as I was informed, he 
rode to Hirundum, answering the notice of local peasants. A monster, as usual.' 

'And he will be paid next to nothing for dealing with it, as usual.' Yennefer's voice changed a bit. 
'And, as usual, it will barely cover the costs of medical treatment, if the beast maims him. As usual. If 
you truly wish to do something for me, Molnar, then get involved in this. Contact the peasants and 
raise the reward. So he'll earn a living.' 

'As usual,' snorted Giancardi. 'What if he finally figures it out?' 

Yennefer glared at Ciri, who was watching them and listening, not even pretending to be interested 
in the Physiologus. 

'Pray, tell,' she retorted. 'Who will break it to him?' 

Ciri lowered her gaze. The dwarf smiled, stroked his beard. 

'Before heading to Thanedd, are you going to stop by Hirundum? Accidentally, of course?' 

'No,' the sorceress turned her head away. 'I'm not. Let's change the subject, Molnar.' 

Giancardi continued stroking his beard and looking at Ciri. Ciri lowered her head, coughed, shifting 
in her chair. 

'Indeed,' he agreed. 'It's time to change the subject. But your pupil seems to have gotten bored with 
the book... and with our conversation. And the thing I want to discuss with you now will bore her even 
more, no doubt... Fate of the world, fate of the dwarfs, fate of their banks, such a boring subject for 
young maidens, future graduates of Aretuza... Let her out from under your wings for a while, 
Yennefer. Let her take a walk in the town...' 

'Oh, yes!' cried out Ciri. 

The sorceress frowned and opened her mouth to protest but suddenly changed her mind. Ciri wasn't 
sure, but suspected that it was influenced by a wink from the banker. 

'Let the girl take a look at the marvellous old town of Gors Velen,' added Giancardi, smiling 
widely. 'She deserves a bit of freedom before... before Aretuza. And we will have a talk about other 
matters... hmm, private matters. No, I'm not suggesting that the girl should walk alone, although it's a 
safe town. I shall give her a companion and a guard. One of my best clerks.' 

'Forgive me, Molnar,' Yennefer didn't return the smile. 'but I doubt than in current times, even in 
such a safe town, the company of a dwarf...' 

'It didn't even cross my mind,' Giancardi said offensively, 'to pick a dwarf for her companion. The 
clerk I've been thinking of is a son of a respected merchant. A full-blooded human. Do you think that I 
only hire dwarves? Oi, Wilfi! Call Fabio here, lively!' 

'Ciri,' the sorceress came up to her and whispered, 'don't get any foolish ideas, please. Don't cause 
me any shame. And keep your mouth shut when you're with that clerk, understood? Promise me that 
you'll be careful. Don't nod. Vows ought to be made in clear voice.' 

'I promise, Mistress Yennefer.' 

'Don't forget to look at the sun from time to time. You will return at noon. Be punctual. And if... 
No, I doubt anyone will recognize you. But if you notice anyone staring at you...' 

The sorceress reached to her pocket, taking out a tiny chrysoprase marked with runes and shaped 
like an hourglass. 

'Hide it in your sack. Don't lose it. If the need arises... Do you remember the spell? But be discreet, 
because the active amulet emits strong vibrations and the activation itself leaves an echo. If you are 
close to someone sensitive to magic you will not conceal yourself but rather reveal your presence. Ah, 
and here you can have... in case you want to buy anything.' 

'Thank you, Mistress Yenenfer.' Ciri put the amulet and coins to the sack and stared curiously at 
the boy entering the office. The boy had freckles and wavy auburn hair, reaching the collar of his grey 
uniform. 

'Fabio Sachs,' Giancardi announced. The boy bowed with respect. 

'Fabio, this is Lady Yennefer, our honourable guest and client. And this young lady, her pupil, 
wishes to tour the town. You will accompany her, guide and protect her.' 


The boy bowed again, this time in the direction of Ciri. 

'Ciri,' said Yennefer coldly. 'Stand up, please.' 

She complied, surprised, knowing the customs enough to be aware that such gesture isn't required 
of her. Suddenly, a realisation hit her. The clerk appeared to be her peer, yet he was a head shorter 
than her. 

'Molnar,' sighed the sorceress. 'Who is supposed to watch over whom? Could you give this task to 
someone with a bit more impressive posture?' 

The boy blushed and gazed at his master searching for permission. Giancardi nodded with 
encouragement. The clerk bowed once again. 

'Honourable lady,' he started smoothly and with no hesitation. 'I may not be tall but you can rely 
on me. I know the town and surroundings well. I will take care of young lady best I can. And when I, 
Fabio Sachs Junior, son of Fabio Sachs, swear to do something best I can then... then many a man 
cannot compete.' 

Yennefer gazed at him for a while, then turned to the banker. 

'Congratulations, Molnar,' she said. 'You know how to pick your staff. This young clerk will be of 
great use to you in the future. Indeed, a diamond in the rough. Ciri, I entrust you to the care of Fabio, 
son of Fabio, for it is a man of honour and can be relied on.' 

The boy flushed red as a tomato. Ciri realised that she had too. 

'Fabio,' the dwarf opened a casket, rummaging through its contents. 'Here's a half-noble and 
three... and two fivers. In case the young lady has any wishes. If she doesn't have any, you will return 
them. Now, off you go.' 

'Noon, Ciri,' reminded Yennefer. 'Not a second later.' 

'I know, I know.' 

 

*** 

 

'I'm Fabio,' said the boy, once they ran down the stairs onto a busy street. 'And your name is Ciri, 
right?' 

'Yes.' 

'What would you like to see in Gors Velen, Ciri? The Main Street? Goldsmith's Lane? Seaport? Or 
maybe the town square and the market?' 

'Everything.' 

'Hmm,' pondered the boy. 'We only have time until noon... We should go to the town square then. 
It's a market day today, so you can see a lot of interesting things. But before that, we'll climb up the 
wall, from which you can see the whole Bay and the famous Thanedd Island. What do you think?' 

'Let's go.' 

The street was full of rumbling carts hauled by horses and oxen; coopers rolling barrels; noise and 
haste. The disorder made Ciri a bit dizzy – clumsily, she stepped down the wooden pavement and fell 
ankle-high into mud and manure. Fabio offered his hand but she rejected the help. 

'I can walk by myself!' 

'Hmm... of course. Let's go then. The place we're in right now is the main streets of the town. It's 
called Kardo and it connects both gates, The Main Gate and the Sea Gate. This way here leads to the 
town hall. Do you see that tower with the golden weathervane? That's the town hall. And that place 
with the colourful sign is a tavern called the Unlaced Corset. But there, hmm... we won't go there. 
We'll take a route through the fish market on Circuit Street.' 

They made a turn in the alley and entered a tiny square pressed between the walls of houses. The 
square was filled with stalls, barrels and vats smelling of fish. Merchants and buyers were involved in 
loud negotiations, as if trying to outcry the seagulls circling above their heads. Cats were lying 
underneath the wall, pretending not to be interested in fish in the slightest. 

'Your mistress,' said Fabio suddenly, 'seems very firm.' 

'I know.' 

'She's not a close relative of yours, right? It's plain at first sight!' 

'It is? How?' 


'She's very beautiful,' answered Fabio with the cruel, disarming honesty of a youth. Ciri spun 
abruptly, but before she had a chance to retort with a biting remark alluding to his height and freckles, 
the boy was already dragging her between the trolleys, barrels and stalls, while explaining that the 
turret adjoining the square is called The Thief's Tower, that it was built of stones found at the bottom 
of the sea, and that the trees growing beneath it are called sycamores. 

'You sure are quiet, Ciri,' he noticed after a while. 

'Me?' she feigned surprise. 'Nothing of the sort! I'm just listening to what you're telling me. You're 
very informed, you know. I was meaning to ask...' 

'Ask away.' 

'If it far from here to... to the town Aretuza?' 

'Not at all! But Aretuza isn't a town. Let's climb up the wall, I'll show you. The stairs are over 
there.' 

The wall was high and the stairs were narrow. Fabio had a hard time catching his breath, as he 
never stopped talking. Ciri was informed that the wall surrounding Gors Velen was a fairly new 
construction, much younger than the town itself, which had been built by the elves; that it was thirty 
five feet tall and that this type of a construction was called a casemate wall, made of hewn stone and 
adobe brick, because this sort of material was best-suited to withstand blows from a battering ram. 

Cool marine wind blew at the top. Ciri gladly inhaled it after the thick air of the town. She laid her 
elbows on the edge of the wall, looking down at the seaport, rich in colours from the sails. 

'What is that, Fabio? That mountain?' 

'Thanedd Isle.' 

The isle appeared to be very close. And it didn't resemble an island at all. It looked like a giant 
stone pole emerging from the waves; a huge ziggurat engirdled by a spiral path, zigzags of stairs and 
terraces. Terraces were engulfed in green from the amount of groves and gardens, and the green was 
adorned with soaring white towers stuck to the rock like swallow nests, and by decorative domes 
crowning the buildings surrounded by galleries. The building didn't appear to have been put up. They 
seemed to have been carved in the slopes of that mountain in the sea. 

'All of this was built by the elves,' explained Fabio. 'By the use of elvish magic, as is said. But for 
as long as we can remember, Thanedd belongs to the wizards. Near the peak, close to those shiny 
domes, there's Garstang palace. In a few days, a big convent of the wizards will take place there. And 
look, there at the very top, that high, lone tower with crenulations – that's Tor Lara, Seagull's 
Tower...' 

'Can it be accessed from the land? It's quite close.' 

'It's possible. There's a bridge connecting the shore with the island. We can't see it from here 
because it's behind the trees. Can you see the red roofs at the feet of the mountain? That's Loxia 
palace. That's where the bridge leads. Only through Loxia you can get to the path leading to the upper 
terraces...' 

'And what's at that place with all those beautiful groves and ponds? And gardens? I don't know 
why it doesn't fall off the rock... What is the name of this palace?' 

'This is Aretuza, the one you were asking about. That's where the famous school of sorceresses is.' 

'Ah,' Ciri licked her lips. 'So that's where... Fabio?' 

'Yes?' 

'How often do you see the students of this school? This Aretuza?' 

The boy gaped at her, clearly surprised. 

'Never! No one ever sees them! They're not allowed to leave the island and go out to the town. And 
no one from outside is allowed at the school grounds. Even the Count and the Bailiff, when they want 
something from the sorceresses, go only as far as to Loxia. On the lowest level.' 

'Just as I thought,' Ciri nodded, gazing at the shiny roofs of Aretuza. 'This isn't a school but a 
prison. On an island, on a rock, above an abyss. Nothing but a prison.' 

'Maybe a bit,' admitted Fabio. 'It must be difficult to get out of there... But no, it's not the same as 
being in prison. The students are young ladies, after all. They need to be guarded...' 

'Against what?' 

'Well...' the boy was stammering. 'You know...' 


'No, I don't.' 

'Hmm... I think... Oh, Ciri, they're not locked up there by force. They want it themselves...' 

'Yeah, right,' Ciri grinned mischievously. 'They wanted it, so now they're stuck in this prison. If 
they hadn't, then they wouldn't let themselves be locked up. It's not hard; the key is to make a run 
early. Before they get there, because it might be difficult later...' 

'What do you mean? Run? Where to...?' 

'These poor souls,' she interrupted, 'probably had nowhere to run. Fabio? Where's the town... 
Hirundum?' 

The boy gave her a confused look. 

'Hirundum's not a town,' he corrected. 'It's a huge farm. There are orchards and gardens providing 
vegetables and fruit to all towns in the region. There are also many ponds with carps and other fish...' 

'How far is Hirundum? Which way is it? Show me.' 

'Why would you need to know that?' 

'I asked you to show me.' 

'See that road, leading west? The one the wagons are at? That's the road to Hirundum. About 
fifteen miles, through the woods.' 

'Fifteen miles', Ciri repeated after him. 'Not far for a good horse... Thank you, Fabio.' 

'What for?' 

'Never mind. Now take me to the market. You promised.' 

'Let's go then.' 

Ciri had never before seen such a hustle and bustle like the one at the square in Gors Velen. The 
noisy fish market they had just crossed seemed quiet as a temple in comparison. The square itself was 
gigantic and yet so crowded that it appeared as if they would only be able to see it from afar, because 
getting anywhere close to it would be miracle. Fabio, however, managed to get through the rabble, 
pulling Ciri behind him. 

Vendors were yelling, customers were even louder, children lost in the crowd cried and screamed. 
Cattle were bellowing, sheep were bleating, birds were clucking and quacking. Dwarven blacksmiths 
keenly hit some plates with hammers, stopping every now and then to drink and curse. The sounds of 
pipes and dulcimer could be heard from several directions. In addition to that, someone hidden in 
rabble continuously blew into a zurna. It was certainly not a professional musician. 

Ciri dodged before a squealing swine and fell onto chicken cages. Someone pushed her and she 
stepped on something soft and meowing. She leapt away, almost falling between the hooves of a huge, 
stinking and terrifying animal. 

'What was that?' she groaned, regaining her balance. 'Fabio?' 

'A camel. Don't be scared.' 

'I'm not scared!' 

She took a curious look around. She watched the halflings, busy crafting decorative goatskins, she 
cooed over beautiful dolls sold by a pair of half-elves. She gazed at products made of malachite and 
jasper, offered by a grim and gloomy gnome. She regarded with connoisseurship swords at the 
blacksmiths workshop. Afterwards, she observed for a while girls weaving wicker baskets and came 
to the conclusion that there's nothing in the world that would be worse than work. 

The zurnist stopped blowing. Someone probably killed him. 

'What is this wonderful smell?' 

'Doughnuts,' Fabio groped the pouch. 'Do you wish to try one?' 

'I wish to try two.' 

The vendor handed three doughnuts, took a fiver and gave a change of four pennies, one broken in 
half. Ciri watched the breaking of the penny, hungrily devouring the first doughnut. 

'Is this,' she asked, while reaching for the other one, 'where the saying 'halfpenny's worth' comes 
from?' 

'Indeed,' Fabio bit on his doughnut. 'Didn't you have halfpennies at your home?' 

'No,' Ciri licked her fingers. 'At my home we had golden ducats. Besides, the whole breaking thing 
was stupid and pointless.' 

'Why?' 


'Because I wish to try one more.' 

The plum filling of the doughnuts worked magic. Ciri was in high spirit and the bustling square 
ceased to terrify and began fascinating her instead. She no longer followed Fabio, now she was the 
one who drugged the other in the biggest crowd, to a place where someone spoke to the mob from a 
makeshift platform supported on barrels. The speaker was a fat, old man. Judging by his shaved head 
and grey robe Ciri assumed him to be an errant priest. She had seen some of them when they visited 
the Melitele Temple in Ellander. Mother Nenneke always called them, 'the insane fanatics.' 

'There's only one law in the world,' bellowed the fat priest. 'God's law! All of nature is subjected to 
it, the whole earth and everything living on it! But magic and spells are defying this law! And so 
wizards are cursed and the day of retribution is nigh, the day when holy fire will destroy their 
accursed isle! The walls will fall, of Loxia, Aretuza and Garstand, the walls in which these pagans are 
gathering right now to plot and scheme. The walls will fall...' 

'And then I'll have to put them bloody things back up again,' complained the journeyman mason in 
a lime-stained coat, who stood next to Ciri. 

'I'm warning you, good, god-fearing men!' yelled the priest. 'Don't trust wizards; don't turn to them 
in your need! Don't let them trick you with their beauty nor learned speak, for let it be known that 
wizards are like whitewashed graves, clean from the outside, stinking on the inside! 

'Look at 'im,' said a young maiden with a basket full of carrots. 'All them big words... 'e's barkin' 
at magicians out of spite, no doubt!' 

'Sure thing,' agreed the mason. 'Himself bald like an egg, beard tanglin' between his knees. And 
wizards neither grow fat nor go bald... And sorceresses, heh, what beauty... 

'For that beauty they sold their souls to the devil!' cried a short man with cobbler's hammer hooked 
at his belt. 

'You're a fool, shoemaker. If not for kind ladies of Aretuza, you would've gone out of business long 
ago! Their money pays for your stew!' 

Fabio pulled Ciri's sleeve and they dove back into the crowd which was moving to the centre of the 
square. They could hear the rumbling of the drums and loud calls for silence. The mob wasn't willing 
to obey but the town crier didn't seem bothered by it. He had a sonorous voice and experience in using 
it. 

'It is hereby announced,' he shouted, unrolling a parchment. 'That Hugo Ansbach, halfling-born, 
has become an outlaw, for he has given room and hospitality to elven bandits going by the name of 
Squirrels. The same applies to Justin Ingvar, a blacksmith, born a dwarf, who had been forging arrows 
for those scoundrels. Therefore, the Count has issued arrest warrants for both. Whoever captures them 
shall receive a reward: fifty crowns in cash. And whoever offers them shelter or food shall be regarded 
as an accomplice and punished as severely as the criminals themselves. And if they are found in a 
field or a village, then the whole farm or village shall be held accountable...' 

'Who would,' yelled one of the spectators, 'give shelter to a halfling? Search the farms of their 
brethren and you'll find them there, and then throw them all, nonhuman scum, in the scorpion pit!' 

'To the gallows with them, not the pit!' 

The town crier continued reading announcements of the Count and town council, but Ciri lost 
interest. She was just about to leave the crowd when she felt a hand groping her bottom. It was in no 
way accidental, completely tactless and surprisingly skilled. The narrow space made it almost 
impossible to turn, but Ciri had learned in Kaer Morhen how to move in places where it's difficult to 
do so. She spun around, creating a bit of commotion in the process. The bald priest standing behind 
her grinned with arrogance. The grin appeared to say - What are you going to do now? Blush cutely 
and nothing more, yes? 

The priest clearly never dealt with Yennefer's ward. 

'Keep your paws to yourself, baldie!' Ciri hissed with fury. 'Grab your own ass, you... you 
whitewashed grave!!!' 

Taking advantage of the fact that priest couldn't move while trapped in the crowd, she tried to kick 
him, but Fabio prevented her, quickly drawing her away from the clergyman. Seeing her shake with 
anger he proceeded to calm her down with sugar-sprinkled funnel cake, the sight of which 
immediately turned Ciri's thought away from the incident. They stopped next to a stall which offered 


them a good view at the scaffold and pillory. The pillory, however, hoed no wrongdoer and the 
scaffold itself was decorated with flower garlands and was used by a troupe of wandering musicians, 
playing on fiddles and blowing bagpipes and shawms. A young, dark-haired girl in a sequin-
embroidered jerkin was dancing and singing, shaking a tambourine and merrily stepping with her tiny 
boots. 

A sorceress bit viciously by serpents cold and vile, 

Observed the reptiles choke and die as she did herself smile! 

The crowd around the scaffold cheered loudly and clapped to the rhythm. The seller of funnel cake 
threw a new portion in the boiling oil. Fabio licked his fingers and pulled Ciri by the sleeve. 

There were plenty of stalls and many offered various snacks. They ate a creampuff each, then – 
together – a smoked eel, as well as some very peculiar thing, fried and served on a stick. Afterwards, 
they made a stop at the barrels with sauerkraut and pretended to be interested in buying to get a 
sample. When they stuffed themselves and left without buying anything, the merchant called them 
little shits. 

They moved ahead. Fabio spent the rest of his money on a basket of bergamot pears. Ciri looked up 
at the sun but decided that it wasn't yet noon. 

'Fabio? What it's in those tents and booths under the wall?' 

'Various attractions. Would you like to take a look?' 

'I do.' 

People standing before the first tent were all men, shifting their legs with excitement. Sounds of 
flute came from the inside. 

'Dark-skinned Leila,' Ciri deciphered the lopsided sign on the side. 'Reveals in her dance all 
secrets of her body... How silly! What kind of secrets...' 

'Let's go, let's go,' urged Fabio, flushing pink. 'Oh, look, this is interesting. It's the clairvoyant's 
booth. I have two pennies left, it should be enough...' 

'Such a waste of money,' scoffed Ciri. 'A two-penny prophesy! One has to be a real prophet to 
know the future. Prophesying is a great talent. Even among the sorceresses only one out of every 
hundred has this ability.' 

'My oldest sister,' disagreed the boy, 'was foretold that she would marry and she really did. Don't 
be petty, Ciri. Let's go in....' 

'I don't want to marry! I don't want any prophecies! It's hot and this booth is stinking of incense, 
I'm not going inside. If you want to, then go alone, I'll wait. I don't know why you need a prophecy so 
badly. What do you want to know?' 

'Well...' stammered Fabio. 'What I want to know most is... if I will become an explorer. I want to 
be an explorer in the future. To travel the whole world...' 

He will, Ciri realized suddenly, feeling her head spin. He will be sailing on huge white ships... He'll 
reach lands no one has seen before... Fabio Sachs, the great explorer... A cape will be named after 
him, a headland of a continent which is yet to be named. At fifty-four he will have a wife, son and 
three daughters, but he will die far from his home and family... Of a disease which is yet to be named. 

'Ciri! What's wrong?' 

She rubbed her face with her palm. She felt like she'd just emerged from water, swimming towards 
the surface from the bottom of a deep, ice-cold lake. 

'It's nothing...' she muttered, looking around. 'I feel a bit dizzy... It must be the heat. And the 
incense...' 

'I think it might be that sauerkraut,' said Fabio with seriousness. 'We shouldn't have eaten so much. 
My tummy feels weird too.' 

'I'm fine!' Ciri boldly raised her head, indeed feeling much better. The realization which had struck 
her now dispelled, lost from memory. 'Come, Fabio. Let's go ahead.' 

'Want another pear?' 

'Sure I do!' 

Under the wall, a group of youths were playing a spinning top game for money. The top was spun 
with a pull of the string in such a way that it rolled around the chalk circles. Ciri had outplayed most 
boys from Skellige and all girls at the Melitele Temple. She was considering the possibility of joining 


the game and taking from the urchins not just their money, but their patched breeches as well, when 
her attention was drawn away by loud shouts. 

At the very end of the line of tents and booths, cramped between the wall and stone stairs, stood a 
curious, half-round construction, formed by sheets spanned over copper rods. Between two such rods 
was an entry, guarded by a tall, pockmarked man, dressed in gambeson and striped pants. Before him 
a crowd had formed. People lined up to throw a handful of coins into the man's hand and then 
disappear under the sheet. The pockmarked man put the money in a metal box and shook it crying 
hoarsely. 

'Come, good men! Come! See with your own eyes the most terrifying monster the gods have made! 
Shock and horror! A living basilisk, the venomous terror of Zerrikanian deserts, devil incarnated, 
hungry for human flesh! You've never seen a monster like it, men! A fresh catch from the Corrabian 
Seas! See him; see the living, stern basilisk with your own eyes, because you will never see another 
anywhere else! This is your only chance! Here, at my tent, for just three fivers! Two fivers for women 
with kids!' 

'Ha!' exclaimed Ciri, brushing off the wasps buzzing around the pears, 'A basilisk? A living one 
too? I must see it. I've only seen pictures of it. Let's go, Fabio.' 

'I don't have any money left...' 

'But I do. I'll pay for us both. Let's make haste.' 

'That will be six fivers,' the pockmarked individual peered at the coins dropped on his hand. 'Three 
fivers each. Lower price only for women with kids.' 

'He,' Ciri pointed her pear at Fabio, 'is a kid. And I am a woman.' 

'Lower price only for women with kids in their arms.' Growled the man. 'Add two more fivers, 
witty lass, or make way for others. Make haste, people. Only three more tickets left!' 

Under the canvas, spectators were gathered, surrounding a makeshift podium on which stood a 
wooden cage, covered with a carpet. When the tent was full, the pockmarked man stepped onto the 
podium, grabbed a long rod and knocked off the carpet. The stench of carrion sprawled around. The 
mob rustled and backed away. 

'Smart move, my good men,' commented the man. 'It's not safe to get too close!' 

Inside the cage, clearly too small for it, lay a curled up reptile, whose skin was covered in scales 
forming a curious pattern. When the pockmarked man poked the cage, the reptile tussled, stretched its 
neck and hissed furiously, exposing its pointy, sharp, white teeth. The spectators sighed loudly. A 
small, fluffy dog yipped from the arms of a woman, who looked like a merchant. 

'Observe it well, my good men,' yelled the pockmarked man. 'And be happy that abominations like 
this one don't live in our vicinity! This is a monstrous basilisk from Zerrikania! Don't come any 
closer, because even locked in a cage, it can still kill you with its breath!' 

Ciri and Fabio made their way to the front. 

'The basilisk,' the men on the podium went on, 'is the most venomous creature in the world! For 
the basilisk is the king of all reptiles! If there were more of them around, the world would be doomed! 
Fortunately, it's a very rare monster, because it can only be born from an egg laid by a rooster. And as 
you all know, no rooster lays eggs but for a deviant who offers his rump to another like a hen would.' 

The spectators burst into laughter at the joke. The only one who didn't laugh was Ciri, staring at the 
creature which attacked the bars annoyed by the noise, trying in vain to unfurl its maimed wings. 

'Eggs laid by this rooster,' continued the pockmarked man, 'must be brood by a hundred and one 
venomous snakes! And once the basilisk hatches...' 

'This is no basilisk.' Stated Ciri, biting on the pear. The pockmarked man glared at her. 

'And once the basilisk hatches, I said,' he repeated, 'it devours all the snakes from its nest, 
absorbing their venom. It absorbs so much that it can kill not just with a scratch of its teeth and the 
touch of its scales, but even with its breath alone. And if a knight impales it with his spear, then the 
poison spreads all the way to his arm, killing the rider and the horse at the same time!' 

'That's an untrue untruth!' said Ciri, spitting out a seed. 

'It's the truest truth!' objected the man. 'It will kill the rider and it will kill the horse!' 

'As if!' 

'Quiet, girl!' scolded the merchantress with the dog. 'Don't interrupt! We want to hear more!' 


'Let it go, Ciri.' Advised her Fabio, nudging her side. Ciri hissed at him, reaching for the next pear. 

'From the basilisk,' the pockmarked man raised his voice, 'runs every living thing, the moment 
they hear its hiss. Every living thing, even the dragon, even the crocodile, and the crocodile is a 
terrifying creature in itself, you know if you've seen it. There is just one animal which doesn't fear the 
basilisk and that is the marten. The marten seeing the basilisk in the desert rushes quickly to the forest, 
searching for a secret herb known only to it and eats it. Then the basilisk's venom no longer works on 
the marten and it can bite the monster to death...' 

Ciri sneered loudly. 

'Oi, smartypants!' the pockmarked man lost control. 'If you don't like it then get lost! There's no 
point in listening and looking at the basilisk!' 

'It's not a basilisk.' 

'Oh, yes? What is it then, miss know-it-all?' 

'A wyvern.' Replied Ciri, licking her fingers. 'A simple wyvern. Young, rather small, starved and 
dirty. But still just a wyvern.' 

'Oh, look!' yelled the man. 'What an expert! Better shut your mouth or...' 

'Enough!' spoke a fair-haired youth in a velvet beret and squire's clothes, who was supporting by 
the arm a fragile-looking lady in apricot-coloured dress. 'Manners, sir monster-catcher. Do not 
threaten a lady or I'll be forced to scold you with my steel. And the whole affair feels like a scam to 
me!' 

'What scam, honourable knight?' the pockmarked man bridled up. 'The brat is -- I mean, the young 
lady is wrong. It's definitely a basilisk!' 

'It's a wyvern.' Repeated Ciri. 

'This is no vern! It's a basilisk! Look how ferocious it is, how it hisses, how it bites the bars! Look 
what huge fangs it has. Fangs like a...' 

'Like a wyvern.' Ciri pulled a face. 

'If you're so knowledgeable,' the man gazed at her like a true basilisk, 'then come closer! Come 
and let its breath sweep over you! Do it and everyone will see you drop dead! Come on!' 

'Gladly.' Ciri wrestled her arm from Fabio's grip and took a step forward. 

'I won't allow it!' cried the fair-haired squire, leaving behind his apricot companion and standing in 
Ciri's way. 'I won't let you endanger yourself, my lady!' 

Ciri flushed at the title, gazed at the squire and fluttered her eyelashes at him in the way she had 
practiced on Jarre the scribe. 

'There is no risk, my chivalrous knight.' She smiled seductively, forgetting Yennefer's warnings 
and her story about the idiot and the cheese. 'No harm will happen to me. That whole poisonous 
breath is a bluff.' 

'Nevertheless,' the youth lay his arm on the hilt of his sword, 'I wish to be by your side. For your 
safety and protection... will you let me?' 

'I will.' Ciri couldn't figure out why the expression of anger on apricot-lady's face filled her with 
so much delight. 

'I'm the one who's caring for her safety!' Fabio threw the squire a challenging glare. 'And I will go 
with her too!' 

'My good men,' Ciri was swelling with pride, 'Show some dignity. Do not fight. There's enough 
room for you both.' 

The surrounding crowd babbled when she approached the cage, almost feeling the breaths of both 
boys on the back of her head. The wyvern hissed furiously and tussled, its reptilian stench attacking 
their nostrils. Fabio grunted loudly but Ciri didn't back off. She came even closer and reached to the 
cage, almost touching it. The monster threw itself on the bars, scratching them with its fangs. The 
crowd rustled, someone cried out. 

'So?' Ciri boasted, turning around. 'Am I dead? Have I been poisoned by his supposedly venomous 
creature? If this is a basilisk then I am...' 

She paused, seeing her companions' faces suddenly go pale. She spun abruptly and watched how 
the bars bend under pressure of the enraged beast. 

'Everyone escape!' she yelled. 'The cage is breaking!' 


Screaming spectators ran to the exit. Some were trying to make way under the sheets but they only 
got themselves and others entangled in it. The squire caught Ciri's arm at the exact same moment she 
tried to leap away; as a result they both lost foothold and fell down, taking Fabio with them. The 
merchantress' fluffy dog was yipping, the pockmarked man was cursing and the apricot lady gave a 
piercing shriek. 

The bars broke with a crack and the wyvern emerged from the cage. The pockmarked man jumped 
down from the podium and tried to keep it back with a stick but the monster disarmed him with one 
blow and whipped its spiky tail at him, making a bloody mess of his pockmarked cheek. Hissing and 
unfurling its maimed wings, the wyvern flew down from the podium and pounced at Ciri, Fabio and 
the squire, who were trying to pick themselves up from the ground. The apricot lady fell unconscious. 
Ciri considered leaping away but realized that she wouldn't make it in time. 

They were saved by the fluffy dog, which had escaped the merchantress, who was now entangled in 
the sheet and her own dresses. Yipping madly, the dog pounced at the monster. The wyvern hissed, 
raised its body, caught the dog in its claws and sunk teeth in its neck. The dog whimpered loudly. 

The squire rose to his feet and reached to his side, but he didn't find his sword, because Ciri was 
quicker. She drew the sword with one rapid move and made a roundhouse jump. The wyvern rose, 
dog's severed head hanging from its jaws. 

It seemed to Ciri as if all the moves she had learned in Kaer Morhen had executed themselves 
without her will. She cut the surprised wyvern in the belly and dodged when the reptile jumped at her. 
The beast fell onto the sand, bleeding profusely. Ciri jumped over it, aptly dodging the tail, walloped 
the monster in the neck with precision, swerved, performed an unnecessary dodge out of a habit, and 
gave the opponent another blow, this time crushing its spine. The wyvern curled up and lay 
motionless, with the exception of its tail, which still writhed and banged, raising a cloud of sand. 

Ciri quickly shoved the blood-stained steel into the squire's hand. 

'Everything's alright!' she yelled to the gathering spectators. 'The monster is dead! This brave 
warrior killed it!' 

Suddenly, she felt a clench in her throat and stomach and her vision darkened. Something had given 
her a mighty blow in the ass. She looked around disoriented and realized that said something was, in 
fact, the ground. 

'Ciri...' whispered Fabio kneeling beside her, 'What's wrong? Gods, you're pale as a ghost...' 

'It's a pity,' she muttered, 'that you can't see yourself.' 

People were gathering around them. Some were poking wyvern's corpse with sticks and brooms, 
some were checking on the pockmarked man; the rest was applauding the heroic squire, fearless 
dragon-slayer, the one who prevented a massacre. The squire was trying to revive the apricot lady, 
still staring with confusion at the hilt of his sword, covered in dried blood. 

'My hero...' the apricot lady regained consciousness and threw her arms around squire's neck. 'My 
saviour! My beloved!' 

'Fabio,' murmured Ciri, seeing town guards making their way through the crown. 'Help me up and 
take me away from here. Fast!' 

'Poor children...' a fat townswoman nodded at them when they were sneaking away from the 
commotion. 'You sure were lucky. If not for the brave warrior your mothers would cry their eyes out 
after you!' 

'Find out whom the youth is working for!' yelled craftsman in a leather coat, 'He deserves to be 
knighted for this deed!' 

'And the monster-catcher to the pillow! He deserved a good whipping! Bringing such a beast to a 
town, among the people...' 

'Water, quick! The lady has lost consciousness again!' 

'My poor Princess!' wailed the merchantress leaning above whatever was left of the dog. 'My poor 
baby! Peopleee! Catch his girl, this rogue who annoyed the dragon! Where is she? Capture her! It's 
not the monster-catchers fault, but hers!' 

The guards, helped by many volunteers, began combing the crowd. Ciri managed to get over her 
dizziness. 


'Fabio,' she whispered, 'We need to split up. We'll meet in the same alley we arrived here from. 
Go. And if someone stops you and asks about me, feign ignorance.' 

'But... Ciri...' 

'Go!' 

She squeezed Yennefer's amulet and activated the spell. The spell worked immediately and just on 
time. The guards, who were already making way in the crowd towards her, stopped confused. 

'The Hell?' moaned one, looking directly at the place Ciri stood. 'Where she at? I've just seen her 
'round here!' 

'Over there! Over there!' yelled the other one, painting at the opposite direction. 

Ciri turned around and walked away, still a bit dizzy from the rush of adrenaline and activation of 
the amulet. The amulet worked exactly the way it was supposed to – nobody could see her. Nobody at 
all. As a result, before getting out of the crowd, she was shoved countless times, kicked and stepped 
on. She missed by a heartbeat a crate thrown down from a wagon. She was almost stabbed with a 
pitchfork. Spells, it seemed, had a bad side as well as a good side – and just as many values as flaws. 

The amulet didn't operate for long. Ciri didn't have enough power to control it and prolong its 
work. Fortunately, the spell stopped working at the right moment – just as she stepped out of the 
rabble and saw Fabio waiting for her. 

'Oh, dear!' sighed the boy, 'Oh dear, Ciri. You're here. I was so worried...' 

'You were worried for nothing. Let's go back. The noon has passed already, we must make haste.' 

'You sure dealt with that monster well.' The boy gazed at her with respect. 'You were moving so 
fast! Where did you learn to move like that?' 

'Like what? The wyvern was killed by the squire.' 

'Not true. I saw it myself...' 

'You saw nothing! Please, Fabio, don't tell anybody about it. Not one soul. And definitely not lady 
Yennefer. Oh, she would scold me so hard if only she knew...' 

She was quiet for a while. 

'These people there,' she nodded at the square, 'were right. I was the one who provoked the 
wyvern... it's all because of me...' 

'It's not your fault,' disagreed Fabio. 'The cage was rotten and badly-built. It could burst at any 
moment: an hour from now, tomorrow, the day after... It's better that it happened then, because you 
could save...' 

'The squire saved!' yelled Ciri, 'The squire did! Get it into your thick skull! I swear if you let the 
word out I'll change you into... into something terrible! I know magic! I will magic you into...' 

'Oi!' exclaimed a voice from behind their backs, 'Enough of this!' 

One of the women following them had dark, evenly combed hair, sparkling eyes and thin lips. She 
wore a short, violet silk coat trimmed with dormice fur. 

'Why aren't you in school, student?' she asked coldly, glaring at Ciri. 

'Wait, Tissaia,' said the other woman, younger, tall and blond, in a green dress with a considerable 
neckline. 'I don't recognize her. I don't think she's...' 

'She is.' Cut the dark-haired one. 'I'm certain that she's one of your girls, Rita. You can't possibly 
know them all. She must be one of those who sneaked out through Loxia during the chaos when the 
students changed quarters. And now we shall wait for her explanation. Well, student?' 

'What?' Ciri frowned. 

The woman pursed her thin lips and evened the cuffs of her gloves. 

'Where did you steal that amulet from? Or perhaps someone had given it to you?' 

'What?' 

'Don't test my patience, student. Tell us your name, class and name of your preceptress. Now!' 

'What?' 

'Are you playing dumb, student? Your name! What is your name?' 

Ciri clenched her teeth and her eyes shot green flames at them. 

'Anna Ingeborga Klopstock' she hissed tactlessly. 


The woman raised her hand and Ciri immediately understood the seriousness of her mistake. 
Yennefer had demonstrated to her paralysing spells only once, tired with her long whining. The 
feeling had been considerably unpleasant. It was the same now. 

Fabio cried terrified and leaped towards her but the other woman, the blond one, caught him by the 
collar and forced him to stay in place. The boy jerked his arm but the woman had an iron grip. Ciri 
couldn't move. The dark-haired one bent down and glared at her. 

'I am not in favour of corporal punishment,' she drawled her words coldly, evening her cuffs yet 
again, 'But I will ensure that you're whipped, student. Not for misbehaviour, not for the theft or 
elopement. Not even for wearing illicit clothes, walking out with a boy and telling him about things 
you were forbidden from discussing. No, you will be whipped for being unable to recognize an 
Archmistress.' 

'No!' yelled Fabio. 'Don't hurt her, Ma'am! I am a clerk at Molnar Giancardi's bank and this lady 
is...' 

'Shut up!' yelled Ciri. 'Shut....' The gagging spell was casted quickly and brutally. She could taste 
blood in her mouth. 

'Well?' the blond woman urged Fabio. 

'Speak. Who is this haughty little miss?' 

 

*** 

 

Margarita Laux-Antille emerged from the pool with a splash.. Ciri could not stop herself from 
taking a peek. She saw Yennefer in the nude many times and she didn't think anyone could have a 
more beautiful figure. She was wrong. At the sight of a naked Margarita Laux-Antille even marble 
statues of goddesses and nymphs would sob with jealousy. 

The Sorceress grabbed the bucket of cold water and poured it on her breasts, while swearing 
obscenely and shaking it off. 

'Hey, girl,' she nodded at Ciri, 'be so good and pass me a towel. Come on, stop pouting.' 

Ciri hissed quietly, still offended. When Fabio let out who Ciri was, the sorceresses dragged her 
through half of the city, exposing her to public mockery. In Giancardi's bank the whole incident was 
immediately explained. The Sorceresses apologized to Yennefer, explaining their behaviour. The 
misunderstanding was caused by the disciples of Arethusa, who were temporarily transferred to Loxia 
as the school facilities were turned into rooms for the guests and participants of the convent.. Some 
adepts took advantage of the chaos during the move and fled from Thanedd to the city. Alarmed by 
the activation of Ciri's amulet, Margarita Laux-Antille and Tissaia de Vries mistook her for one. 

The sorcerers' apologized to Yennefer, but none of them thought of apologizing to Ciri. Yennefer 
was looking at her while listening to the apology, and Ciri felt like her ears were burning. And the 
most unfortunate one was Fabio - Molnar Giancardi scolded him so harshly that the boy had tears in 
his eyes. Ciri felt sorry for him, but she was also proud of him - Fabio kept his word and he revealed 
nothing about the wyvern. 

Yennefer, as it turned out, knew Tissaia and Margarita. The Sorceresses had invited them to the 
Silver Heron, the best and most expensive inn in Gors Velen where Tissaia had stayed upon arrival, 
avoiding, for reasons known only to her, approaching the island. Margarita Laux-Antille, who was the 
Principal of Arethusa, had accepted the invitation of the older Sorceress and for a time shared a room 
with her. The inn was real luxury. They were in the basement baths, which Margarita and Tissaia had 
rented for their exclusive use, paying for it an unimaginable amount. Yennefer and Ciri of course, 
were encouraged to use the restrooms and as a result they had all soaked alternately in the pool and 
had spent a few hours sweating in the sauna, as well as non-stop chatting. 

Ciri gave the towel to the Sorceress. Margarita patted her gently on the cheek. Ciri snorted and 
jumped and splashed into the pool of scented rosemary water. 

'Floats like a little leaf', smiled Margarita as she lay down next to Yennefer on a wooden couch. 
'And she is as well formed as a nymph. You're giving her to me, Yenna?' 

'That is why I brought her here.' 

'For a year I take it? She knows the basics?' 


'She knows, but let her start like everyone else, from the beginning. It would not do her any harm.' 

'Good thinking', said Tissaia de Vries, who was busy ordering the drinks that, were on the marble 
table covered with a layer of vapour droplets. 'Good thinking, Yennefer. It will be easier on the girl if 
she starts together with the other novices.' 

Ciri emerged from the pool and sat down on the edge of the timbering, twirling her hair and 
splashing her feet in the water. Yennefer and Margarita chatted idly, occasionally wiping their faces 
with cold, wet towels. 

Tissaia, modestly wrapped in a sheet, did not join the conversation, giving the feeling of being 
totally absorbed in bringing order to the table. 

'I apologize humbly to the noble ladies!', Exclaimed a voice from above from the unseen 
innkeeper. 'Excuse me for daring to disturb, but... an officer urgently wants to see Madame De Vries! 
They say that this will suffer no delay!' 

Margarita Laux-Antille chuckled and winked at Yennefer, after which both, as to an order, 
withdrew the towels from their bosoms and adopted a position convoluted and highly challenging. 

'Let the officer enter!' Cried Margarita, holding back laughter. 'Go Ahead! We are ready!' 

'Like children', sighed Tissaia de Vries, shaking her head 'Cover yourself, Ciri.' 

The officer entered, but the trick of the sorceresses completely fizzled out. The officer was not 
disturbed by the sight before their eyes, didn't blush, never opened their mouth, nor averted their eyes. 
Because the officer was a woman. A tall woman, slender, with a thick black braid and a sword at her 
side. 

'Madame,' said the woman dryly, making a slight bow towards Tissaia de Vries, resulting in a 
rattle of chain mail. 'I bring news that your orders have been executed. I request permission to return 
to the barracks.' 

'Granted,' Tissaia said. 'Thank you for the escort and for your help. Happy journey.' 

Yennefer sat on the couch, and looked at the insignia on the shoulder of the warrior which had the 
colours black, yellow and red. 

'Do you know who I am?' 

The warrior bowed stiffly, wiped her sweaty face. The bath was hot and she wore chain mail and a 
leather jacket. 

'I'm often in Vengerberg,' she said. 'Lady Yennefer. My name is Rayla.' 

'Judging by your badge, you serve in the special forces of King Demavend.' 

'Yes, Madam.' 

'What rank?' 

'Captain.' 

'Very good,' laughed Margarita Laux-Antille. 'I see that the army of Demavend have finally begun 
to give official patent to soldiers who have ovaries.' 

'Can I retire?' The warrior stood up straight, placing her hand on the hilt of her sword. 

'You can.' 

'I noticed the hostility in your voice, Yenna' said Margarita finally. 'What do you have against the 
Lady Captain?' 

Yennefer got up and took two cups from the table. 

'Have you seen the posts that are along the roadside?' She asked. 'You should have seen them; you 
should have smelled the stench of rotting corpses. These posts are her idea and her work. Her and her 
subordinates from the Special Forces. Band of sadists!' 

'This is war, Yennefer. This Rayla has had to see on more than one occasion her comrades-in-arms 
who have fallen alive into the hands of the Squirrels. Hung by their wrists in the trees as a targets for 
arrows. Blinded, castrated with their feet burned in bonfires. The atrocities committed by the 
Scoia'tael would not shame Falka herself.' 

'The methods of the special forces also closely resemble the methods of Falka. However this is not 
it Rita. I do not pity the fate of the elves. I know what war is. I also know how to win a war. You win 
with soldiers with conviction and sacrifice defending the country, defending their homes. And not 
with such as this Rayla, with mercenaries fighting for money, cannot and do not want to sacrifice 
themselves for anyone. They do not even know what it is to sacrifice. And if they do, they despise it.' 


'To the Club, with your sacrifice and contempt. What does it matter to us? Ciri, jump up above and 
bring us another carafe. Today I want to get drunk.' 

Tissaia De Vries sighed and shook her head. This did not escape the attention of Margarita. 

'Fortunately,' she laughed 'we are no longer in school, dear teacher. We are free to do what we 
want.' 

'Even in the presence of a future adept?' Tissaia asked venomously. 'When I was Principal of 
Arethusa ...' 

'I remember, we remember' Yennefer cut in with a smile. 'Although we would like to, we did not 
forget. Go for the carafe, Ciri.' 

Above, while waiting for the carafe, Ciri witnessed the departure of the warrior and her unit, 
consisting of four soldiers. With curiosity and admiration she contemplated their appearances, faces, 
clothes and weapons. Rayla, the captain with the black braid, was in an argument at that moment with 
the proprietor of the inn. 

'I will not wait for the sunrise! And I don't give a fuck that the door is closed! I want to leave the 
city immediately! I know that the inn has its own stables and postern gate! I command you to open it!' 

'The laws ...' 

'Bullshit what do I care for laws. I execute the orders of the great teacher de Vries!' 

'All right, Captain, do not shout, I will open ...' 

The aforementioned gate, as discussed, was a narrow and firmly secured exit leading directly across 
to the other side of the wall of the city. Before Ciri could take the carafe from the hands of the maid 
she watched as the postern gate was opened and Rayla and her unit went outside into the night. 

It was thoughtful. 

'Well, finally,' Margarita said happily although whether it was from seeing Ciri or the carafe that 
she was carrying. Ciri put the carafe on the table, obviously wrong, because Tissaia de Vries 
immediately move it. In serving, Yennefer destroyed the entire composition on the table and once 
again Tissaia started sorting it. Ciri imagined with horror Tissaia in the role of teacher. 

Margarita and Yennefer resumed their conversation not forgetting the carafe. Ciri realised that she 
would soon have to go for another. She sank into her thought while listening to the conversation of the 
sorceresses. 

'No, Yenna', Margarita shook her head. 'You are not someone I see on a regular basis. I broke up 
with Lars. It's over. Elaine deireadh, as the elves say.' 

'Is that why you want to get drunk?' 

'Among other things', confirmed Margarita 'I am sad, I am not hiding. At the end of the day we've 
been together four years. But I had to break up with him. A stick is not a boat ...' 

'Especially,' snorted Tissaia de Vries staring into the golden wine that swayed in her cup 'given 
that Lars is married.' 

'It is,' the sorceress shrugged her shoulders 'irrelevant. All the attractive men of that age that I am 
interested in are married, I cannot help it. Lars loved me, and I seemed for a time I also found that I 
loved him ... Ah what can I say. He wanted too much from me. He threatened my freedom and I gag 
just thinking about monogamy. At the end of the day, I have you as an example, Yenna. Remember 
that conversation in Vengerberg? When you decided to break with your Witcher? I advised you then 
that love is not just lying in the street. Yet it was you who were right. Love is love and life is life. 
Love passes ...' 

'Do not listen to her Yennefer.' Tissaia said with an icy voice. 'She is full of sadness and bitter. Do 
you know why she is not going to the banquet of Arethusa? Because she is embarrassed to be there 
alone, without the man with whom she associated with for four years. They envied her. But she lost it 
because she could not appreciate his love.' 

'Wouldn't it be better to speak of other things?' Yennefer proposed, apparently unconcerned but 
her voice had changed somewhat. 'Ciri, serve us. Damn this carafe is almost empty. Come on, be 
good and bring us another.' 

'Bring two,' smiled Margarita 'As a reward you will get a sip and sit down with us, you will no 
longer have to strain your ears from a distance. Your education starts here, now, from me before you 
reach Arethusa.' 


'Education!' Tissaia rolled her eyes. 'Gods!' 

'Hush dear teacher.' Margarita gave a wet slap to her thigh feinting anger. 'I am now the Principal 
of the school! You do not get to throw me into the final exams!' 

'Well, too bad.' 

'Note that from me too. Now would be a private consultation, like Yenna's and should not tire the 
adept, she wouldn't have to clean up the snot of the mourners, nor quarrel with the proud. Ciri, listen 
and learn. A sorceress always acts. For better or worse, that we'll see later. But we must act, 
courageously and grab life by the horns. Believe me, little one, the only regret is having been inactive, 
indecisive, hesitant. Although sometimes the action and the decision produce grief and sadness, one 
does not repent of them ever. Look at this lady so serious that is sitting there, gesturing pedantically 
and ordering everything on hand. This is Tissaia de Vries, great teacher, who educated tens of 
sorceresses. Teaching them to act. That indecision ...' 

'Leave it, Rita' 

'Tissaia is right,' Yennefer said, looking at a corner of the baths. Leave it. I know that you are sad 
because of Lars, but do not turn this into a lesson for life. The girl will still have time for this kind of 
lessons. And she will not learn them in school. Ciri, go get another carafe.' 

Ciri rose. She was already fully dressed. 

And completely determined. 

 

*** 

 

'What? ' Yennefer screamed. 'What? What do you mean gone?' 

'She told me ...' muttered the innkeeper, turning pale and pressing back against the wall. 'She told 
me to saddle a horse ...' 

'And you listened to her? Instead of asking us?' 

'Lady! How was I to know? I was sure she was following orders .. the thought did not cross my 
mind... ' 

'Fucking idiot!' 

'Easy, Yennefer,' Tissaia pressed a hand to her forehead 'Do not get carried away by emotions. It is 
night. They will not let her out beyond the gates.' 

'She asked,' whispered the innkeeper 'that they open the postern gate ...' 

'And why did they open it?' 

'Because of the conference,' the innkeeper dropped his eyes, 'the village is full of sorcerers ... 
People are afraid, nobody dares to cross their path ... How could I refuse? She spoke just like you 
Madame, the very same voice ... And she even looked the very same way ... no one even dare to look 
her in the eye, let alone ask questions ... It was like you ... the very same thing ... She told me to get 
her a pen and ink ... and wrote a letter' 

'Give it to me.' 

Tissaia de Vries was faster. 

'Lady Yennefer,' she read aloud. 

Forgive me, I'm going to Hirundum because I want to see Geralt. I want to see him before going to 
school. Forgive my disobedience, but I have to do it. I know you will punish me, but I will not regret 
the indecision and hesitation. If I have to regret let it be by action and decision. I am a sorceress. 
Grab life by the horns. I'll be back as soon as I can. 

Ciri. 

'Is that all?' 

'There is a postscript: 

Tell Mrs Rita, that the school will not have to wipe my nose. 

Margarita Laux-Antille shook her head in disbelief. And Yennefer cursed. The innkeeper blushed 
and his mouth fell open. He had heard many curses before, but not that one. 

 

*** 

 


The wind was blowing from the mainland towards the sea. Waves of clouds moved towards the 
moon hanging over the forest. The road to Hirundum was plunged into darkness. Galloping had 
become too dangerous. Ciri slowed the horse down and started to trot. Slowing the horse to a walk 
never crossed her mind. She had to hurry, 

She heard in the distance the rumble of a storm approaching, from time to time the glow of 
lightning shone on the horizon; highlight the sawtooth form of the tree tops. 

She stopped the horse. She was at a crossroads, the road forked into two, with both forks looking 
identical. 

Why had Fabio not said anything about the crossroads? Ah, who cares if I don't know the way, I 
always know where to go ... 

So why now do I not know which fork to take? 

A huge shape noiselessly moved over her head. Ciri's heart felt like it leaped into her throat. The 
horse whinnied, kicked and galloped off in a rush, choosing the right fork. She stopped it after a 
while. 

'It's just a ordinary owl.' she whispered, trying to calm herself and the horse. 'An ordinary bird ... 
There is no reason to be afraid ...' 

The wind intensified, dark clouds covered the moon completely. But before her, in view of the road 
on the path that twisted through the forest, there was a clearing. She rode faster, the dirt sprayed out 
from under the hooves of the horse. 

Soon she had to stop. Before her was a cliff and the sea from which arose the familiar black cone of 
the island. From here she could not see the lights of Garstang, Loxia or Arethusa. She only had eyes 
for the slender, solitary and ornate tower of Thanedd. 

Tor Lara. 

It thundered and a moment later a blinding flash of lightning ribboned across the cloudy sky and 
joined with the top of the tower. Tor Lara windows flashed like red eyes, it seemed as if the inside of 
the tower had been on fire for a second. 

Tor Lara ... The Tower of Seagulls... Why does this name awaken in me such terror? 

The wind shook the trees, the branches rustled, Ciri squinted her eyes, dust and leaves hit her on the 
cheeks. The horse snorted and twisted below her. Ciri managed to recover control. Thanedd Island 
was to the north, she had to head in westward direction. The sandy road lying in the darkness was as a 
clear as a white line. She moved the horse into a gallop. 

The thunder boomed again. Suddenly, in a flash of lightning, Ciri saw riders. Dark, fuzzy, 
silhouettes moving on both sides of the road. She heard a scream. 

'Gar'ean!' 

Without thinking Ciri spurred the horse, pulled the reins, turned and went into a gallop. Behind her 
there was shouting, whistling, neighing and the clatter of hooves. 

'Gar'ean! Dh'oine!' 

Galloping hooves, the rush of wind. A darkness in which shone the white trunks of the birch trees 
along the road. Thunder. In the flash of lightning, Ciri could see two horses were trying to cut off the 
road. One man stretched out his hand, trying to seize the reins. In his hat was pinned the tail of a 
squirrel. Ciri dug her heels into her horse, and laid low across its neck, her momentum throwing the 
hand aside. Behind her, screams, whistles, a roar of thunder. A flash of lightning. 

'Sparle, Yaevinn!' 

Galloping, galloping! Faster, horse! Thunder. Lightning. Fork in the road. To the left! I'm never 
mistaken. Another fork. To the right! Gallop horse! Hurry, hurry! 

The road started to lead up, but the sand under the horse's hooves, although being spurred on, 
started to slow it down... 

At the top of the rise Ciri looked around. Another flash of lightning illuminated the road. 
Completely empty. She listened but could hear nothing but the leaves rustling in the wind. The 
thunder rumbled. 

There was no one there. The Squirrels ... Were just a recollection of Kaedwen. The Rose of 
Shaerrawedd... I found it. The is not a soul here, not one follows me... 


The wind hit her. The wind is blowing from inland she thought, and I feel it on my right cheek ... I 
was lost. 

 Lightning flashed again, its light reflecting off the shining surface of the sea, on its background the 
black cone of Thanedd Island. And Tor Lara. The Tower of Seagulls. The tower which pulls me like a 
magnet... But I do not want to go to that tower, I am going to Hirundum. Because I have to see Geralt. 

The lightning flashed again. 

Between her and the cliff stood a black horse. And on it sat a knight wearing a helmet decorated 
with wings from a bird of prey. Suddenly the wings fluttered, and the bird took flight... 

Cintra! 

A paralysing fear griped her. Her hands clenched painfully around the reins. Lightning flashed. The 
Black Knight reared up on his horse. Instead of a face he wore a monstrous mask. The wings 
fluttered... 

Her horse without any urging went into a gallop. Darkness, punctuated by lightning. 

The forest came to an end and under the horses hooves there was a splash, and the sounds of a 
swamp. The sound followed her from the wings of a bird of prey. Closer... Closer... 

A furious gallop, her eyes wept for more speed. The lightning raced across the sky. In its light Ciri 
could see alders and willows lining both sides of the road. But they were not trees. They were the 
servants of the King of Alders. Servants of the Black Knight, who galloped behind her, and the wings 
of the bird of prey rustling on his helmet. Grotesque monsters on both sides of the road stretch out 
their hands towards her shoulders, laughing wildly, opening the black maws of their mouths. Ciri was 
thrown forward onto the horse's neck. Branches whistle, whip, and hooked on her clothing. Deformed 
trunks creaked, the holes opened and closed, and then become covered in a mocking smile... 

Young lion of Cintra! Child of the Elder Blood! 

The Black Knight was right behind her, Ciri could feel his hands trying to grab her hair. The horse 
fuelled by her screaming, jumped forward, and beyond an invisible barrier, breaking branches with a 
crack... 

 Ciri pulled the reins and leaned into the saddle, she turned the panting horse about. Shouting wildly, 
furiously. She drew her sword from it sheath and swung it over her head. 

This is not Cintra! I'm not a little girl! I'm not unarmed! I will not let you... 

'I will not let you! You will not touch me anymore! You will not touch me ever again!' 

Her horse with a splash and a squelch landed in water, which reached up to its belly. Ciri leaned 
forward and screamed, then struck the stallion with her heels and turned it back towards the bank. A 
pond, she thought. Fabio said something about fishponds. This is Hirundum. I was right. I'm never 
wrong... 

Lightning. Behind her was a dike, and beyond that the black wall of the forest, penetrating into the 
sky like a saw. And nobody else. Only the howling of the wind cut through the silence. Somewhere in 
the swamp a duck quacked in fright. No one. There is nobody on the dike. No one was following me. 
It was a phantom, a nightmare. Memories of Cintra. I only imagined it. 

Off in the distance was a light. A streetlight. Or a fire. It's a farmhouse. Hirundum. It is close. Only 
a little further... 

Lightning flashed. One, two, three. With no thunder. The wind died suddenly. The horse neighed, 
then tossed it head and reared. 

 In the black sky appeared a milky film, which cleared quickly, twisting like a snake. The wind 
blew again, and from the dike arose a dust storm of dead leaves and grasses. 

In the distance , the light faded away. It sank and melted into a flood of a million little fires which 
suddenly glow blue and cover the entire swamp. 

The horse snorted, neighed, the dike raged. Ciri with difficulty remained in the saddle. 

Nightmarish riders appeared like a ribbon that crossed the sky. As they moved closer Ciri was able 
to get a better look at them. Their helmets were bristling with buffalo horns and their plumes were 
frayed. Under the helmets were the white masks of the dead. The riders rode on skeletal horses 
covered with ragged blankets. The wind howled with anger among the alder trees, a sword of 
lightning split the black sky relentlessly. The wind howled even louder. No, she thought, not the wind. 
It's a ghostly song. 


The nightmarish parade turned directly towards her. The hooves of their horses pass through the 
ghostly lights hanging over the swamp. At the head of the host rode the King of the Wild Hunt. A 
rusty helm sat upon his cadaverous face, his eye sockets gaping holes where a livid fire burned. 
Frayed robes fluttered around his body. He wore a breastplate covered in rust, upon which rattled a 
necklace, empty like a pod of beans. Once it contained precious stones. But these had fallen out during 
the wild chase across the sky. And they become the stars... 

This is not real! This is not! It is a nightmare, a hallucination, a delusion! It only seems like it to 
me! 

The King of the Wild Hunt spurred his skeletal steed and broke into a wild and hideous laughter. 

'Child of the Elder Blood! You belong to us! You are ours! Join the procession, join our Hunt! Let 
us run, run to the end of eternity, until the limit of existence! You are ours, daughter of Chaos! Join us 
and know the joy of the Hunt! You are ours, you're one of us! Your place is among us!' 

'No!', she cried 'Be gone! You're dead!' 

The King of the Wild Hunt laughed, his rotten teeth tapped on his rusted armour. His burning eye 
sockets peered from his skull mask. 

'Yes, we are dead. But you are death.' 

Ciri clutched her horses' neck and dug her heels into its side. The horse ran along the dike at a 
dizzying gallop. Behind her she could feel the spectral pursuers. 

 

*** 

 

Bernie Hofmeier, a Halfling and a farmer from Hirundum, raised his curly head, listening to the 
sound of distant thunder. 

'A dangerous thing,' he said 'this storm without rain. Lightning strike in the wrong place and 
there'll be fires...' 

'A little rain would not hurt,' sighed Dandelion, who was tightening the strings of his lute. 'because 
the air is that thick it can be cut with a knife... My shirt is glued to my back, the mosquitoes surround 
us... But I think it going to remain in the clouds. The storm will circle us and will fall somewhere else 
in the north. Perhaps the sea.' 

'It's falling in Thanedd,' confirmed the Halfling. 'It is the highest point in the surrounding area. 
That tower on the island, Tor Lara, draws fucking lightning. During a storm, it looks like it is 
wreathed in flame. It is surprising that it doesn't fall apart...' 

'It's magic,' The troubadour said with conviction. 'Everything about Thanedd is magical, to the 
rocks. And the wizards are not afraid of the lightning. But what am I saying? Did you know, Bernie, 
That they can catch lightning?' 

'Don't fuck with me! You're lying, Dandelion.' 

'May the Gods strike...' the Poet paused, glanced anxiously at the sky. 'May a duck bite me if I'm 
lying. I'm telling you Hofmeier, wizards capture lightning. I've seen it with my own eyes. Old 
Gorazd, the one who was slain on Sodden Hill, once captured lightning right before my very eyes. He 
took a long length of wire, one end fasten to the top of his tower, while the second...' 

'The other end of the wire is put into a bottle,' suddenly spoke the shrill voice of Hofmeier's son 
sitting on the porch, he was a small Halfling with a thick head of curly hair like a sheep's fleece. 'In a 
glass demijohn, like the one that my dad uses stores his wine.' 

'Home, Franklin!' Shouted the farmer. 'To bed, to sleep! It's almost midnight and we have work to 
do tomorrow! And there will be no fooling with bottles and wire during a storm, or you'll get the 
strap. You'll not be sitting on your ass for two weeks! Petunia, take the boy from here. And bring us 
more beer!' 

'You've had enough,' Petunia Hofmeier said angrily as she carried the child inside. 'You've put 
enough already in your gullet.' 

'Do not growl. Soon the Witcher will return. It is proper to treat a guest.' 

'When the Witcher comes back, you can go get it for him.' 

'Oh stingy woman' Hofmeier growled, but so that his wife could not hear. 'All of her family, the 
Biberveldts of Knotweed, are to a man, misers... The Witcher has been gone a long time. He went 


over to the ponds and disappeared. A strange man he is. Did you see the way he was looking at the 
girls Cinni and Tanderinki this evening when they were playing in the yard? Strange look in his eye. 
And now... I get the impression he went to be alone. And that he took lodging in my house because it 
is on the outskirts, away from the others. You know him better Dandelion, tell me... ' 

'Know him?' The Poet killed a mosquito on his neck and strummed his lute as he watched the 
black silhouette of alder trees by the pond. 'No, Bernie. I don't know him. I don't think anyone knows 
him. But something happened to him, I can see it. Why did he come here, to Hirundum? To be closer 
to Thanedd island? And when I proposed yesterday riding together to Gors Velen, from where you 
can view Thanedd Island, he refused without hesitation. What keeps him here? Did you offer him a 
lucrative job?' 

'Well there,' muttered the Halfling 'If I'm being honest, I did not believe that there really is a 
monster. The child that drowned in the pond may have had a cramp. But the point is everyone started 
shouting that it was a Vodyanoi or a Kikimora and that we must call a Witcher... And they offered 
him a soldier's fortune. And what did he do? He spends three nights by the dikes, then sleeps during 
the day or sits without saying a word, watching the children like a mother... Strange. I would say even, 
peculiar.' 

'Well one might say.' 

Lightning flashed, illuminating the farm and buildings. For a moment shone the ruins of an Elven 
palace across the dike. For an instant the orchards rattled with the sound of thunder. Violent winds 
sprang up, trees and reeds rustled over the pond and marred the mirrored surface of the water 
crumpling and tarnishing the tips of the floating water lilies. 

'The storm is headed this way.' Said the farmer glancing at the sky. 'Maybe it's the island 
magicians with their spells? Thanedd must house over two hundred of them... What do you think, 
Dandelion, what are they going to discuss at this convention of theirs? And will it do any good for 
us?' 

'For us? I doubt it.' The troubadour strummed his fingers along the strings of the lute. 'These 
meetings are usually a fashion show, gossiping, backbiting and the opportunity for internal wrangling. 
Quarrels about whether to generalize magic or make it more elitist. Fights between those who are 
kings, and those who prefer to exert pressure on kings from a distance... ' 

'Ha!' Bernie Hofmeier said. 'Then I see that this meeting on Thanedd will be no worse that thunder 
in a storm.' 

'Maybe, But what do we care?' 

'You do.' said the Halfling grimly 'Because you strum the lute and sing. You look at the world 
around and see only rhymes and music. But no more than twice in the past week did the army trample 
our cabbages and turnips beneath the hooves of their horses. The army chases the Squirrels, the 
Squirrels run and disappear and the path of both passes over our cabbages...' 

'No time to mourn the cabbages when the forest burns.' recited the Poet. 

'You, Dandelion,' Bernie Hofmeier looked at him askance 'when you say something I do not know 
whether to laugh, cry or kick you in the ass. I'm serious! And I say that terrible times have come. 
With posts on the highways, gallows, the dead in the fields and the roads, this country is starting to 
feel like the times of Falka. And how can we live like this? By day people come with threats from the 
king that we will be put in the stocks for helping the Scoia'tael. And at night the elves show up and 
you try to refuse them help! Thus, very poetic, see how the night takes on a reddish appearance. It is 
so poetic it makes me want to vomit. And so we are caught in the crossfire...' 

 'You're counting on the Congress of Sorcerers to make a difference?' 

'Count on it. You said yourself that there are two factions among the Sorcerers. There were already 
times when Sorcerers mitigated kings, put end to wars and rebellions. After all it was the Sorcerers 
who made peace with Nilfgaard three years ago. They can now...' 

Bernie Hofmeier paused and pricked up his ears. Dandelion's hand muted the string of the lute. 

From the darkness emerged the Witcher from the direction of the dike. He walked slowly towards 
the house. Again the lightning flashed. When the thunder struck, the Witcher was already with them, 
on the porch. 


'What happened, Geralt?' Dandelion asked to break the awkward silence. 'Did you get the 
monster?' 

'No. This is not a night to track. It's a restless night. Restless... I'm tired, Dandelion.' 

'Then sit down and rest.' 

'You misunderstand me.' 

'Indeed,' muttered the Halfling, looking at the sky and listening. 'A restless night, something evil is 
brewing... The animals are crowded in the barn... and screams can be heard in the wind...' 

'The Wild Hunt ' the Witcher said quietly. 'We'll close the shutters, Mr Hofmeier.' 

'The Wild Hunt?' Bernie was terrified 'Ghosts?' 

'Do not fear. It flies high. In the summer it always flies high. But it may wake the children. The 
Hunt brings nightmares. Better close the shutters.' 

'The Wild Hunt' Dandelion said, glancing nervously up. 'heralds war.' 

'Nonsense. Superstition.' 

'But shortly before the attack on Cintra by Nilfgaard...' 

'Quiet!' The Witcher interrupted with a gesture, straightening up suddenly, staring into the 
darkness. 

'What is...' 

'Horses.' 

'Damn it' Hofmeier hissed, springing up from the bench. 'at night it can only be Scoia'tael...' 

'One horse' the Witcher interrupted, taking up his sword which he had placed on the bench. 'One 
real horse, the rest are the ghost of the Hunt... Damn, it is not possible... In the Summer?' 

Dandelion also rose, but he was ashamed to flee, as neither, Geralt or Bernie had made a move to 
escape. The Witcher drew his sword from it sheath and ran towards the dike, the Halfling without 
hesitation rushed after him, arming himself with a pitchfork along the way. Lightning flashed again, 
illuminating on the dike a galloping horse. And behind the horse came something vague, something 
that was irregular, woven with darkness with glowing flashes, a whirlpool, mirage. Something that 
gave rise to panic, disgusting, visceral horror that twisted the entrails. 

The Witcher cried, raising his sword. The rider saw him and hasted their gallop, steering the mount 
towards him. The Witcher cried again. Thunder boomed overhead. 

There was a flash again, this time it was not lightning. Dandelion crouched next to the bench and 
would have crawled under it, but it proved to be too low. Bernie dropped his pitchfork. Petunia 
Hofmeier ran from the house screaming. 

In a blinding flash materialized a transparent sphere, inside loomed a form which was rapidly 
gaining form and shape. Dandelion recognized her immediately. He knew those black curls and that 
obsidian star on a velvet ribbon. What he did not know and had never before seen was her face. The 
face of Fury and Rage, the face of the Goddess of Vengeance, Destruction and Death. 

Yennefer raised her hands and shouted a spell, from her hands poured a hissing spiral of sparks that 
cut the night sky and reflected thousands of times from the surface of the pond. The spirals darted like 
spears through the tangled cloud chasing the lone rider. The cloud gurgled, and to Dandelion it 
seemed that he heard the cries of ghosts, and he saw nightmarish silhouettes of spectral horses. He 
saw it only for a split second because the cloud suddenly shrunk, collapsed into a ball and sped up into 
the sky, stretching with the momentum and dragging behind it a tail like a comet. Darkness fell, lit 
only by the glow of a lantern that Petunia was holding. 

The rider led the horse into the courtyard before the house and jumped from the saddle, the 
hesitated. It was then that Dandelion realized who it was. He had never seen this lean, ashen haired 
girl. But her immediately recognized her. 

'Geralt...' The girl said quietly. 'Lady Yennefer... I'm sorry... I had to. You know...' 

'Ciri' said the Witcher. Yennefer had taken a step towards the girl, but stopped. She was silent. 

To which of the two will she go to first, thought Dandelion. None of them, or the Witcher, or 
Sorceress. To whom will she first approach? To him? Or her? 

Ciri did not approach any of them. She could not choose. So she passed out. 

 

*** 


 

The house was empty, the Halfling and his family had gone to work at dawn. Ciri pretended to 
sleep, so she heard when Geralt and Yennefer left. She slipped out of bed, dressed quickly and quietly 
slipped out of the room, following behind them out into the courtyard. 

Geralt and Yennefer turned towards the dike between the white and yellow water lilies. Ciri hid 
behind a ruined wall and watched both of them through a crack. She had thought that Dandelion, a 
famous poet, whose poems she often used to read, was still asleep. But she was wrong. Dandelion the 
poet was not sleeping. And caught her red-handed. 

'Hey,' he said, approaching suddenly and laughing. 'Is it nice to spy and eavesdrop? More 
discretion, little one. Let them be alone for a while longer.' 

Ciri blushed, but quickly opened her mouth. 

'First, I'm not little.' She whispered proudly. 'And secondly I do not think I'm bothering them, 
right?' 

Dandelion grew serious. 

'Probably not,' he said. 'In fact you might even be helping.' 

'How, In what way?' 

'Don't pretend. You were very clever yesterday. But you didn't fool me. You pretended to faint 
right?' 

'Yes,' she muttered, turning her face away. 'Lady Yennefer realized, but not Geralt...' 

'They brought you inside the house together. Their hands touched. They sat next to your bed almost 
until dawn, but didn't say a word to each other. It's only now that they have decided to talk. There, at 
the dike, by the pond. And you decided to eavesdrop on what they are saying... To spy on them 
through a hole in the wall. Are you so interested in what they are doing there?' 

'They aren't doing anything there. A little talking and that's it.' 

'And you' Dandelion sat down on the grass under and apple tree and leaned his back against the 
trunk, but not before examining to make sure there were no ants or caterpillars, 'Would like to know 
what they are talking about?' 

'Yes... No! And anyway... Anyway, I can't hear anything. They are too far away.' 

'If you want,' the bard laughed 'I'll tell you.' 

'Any how would you know?' 

'Ha, ha. Noble Ciri, I'm a poet. A poet knows all about these kind of issues. I'll tell you something 
else: Poets know more about such matters than the people who are involved.' 

'Sure!' 

'I give you my word. The word of a Poet.' 

'Yes? Well... Well, tell me what they are saying. Explain to me what it all means!' 

'Look out through the hole again and then tell me what they are doing.' 

'Hmm... ' said Ciri biting her lower lip, then leaning down a peered through the crack. 'Lady 
Yennefer is standing by the willow... Pulling off the leaves and playing with her star... She isn't 
saying anything and she isn't looking at Geralt... And Geralt is at her side. He lowered his head. And 
said something. No, he is silent. Oh, what a face... What a funny face he has...' 

'Child's play.' Dandelion found an apple in the grass which he started to rub against his pants and 
then examined critically. 'He is asking her to forgive him for his various foolish words and actions. 
He apologizes for his impatience, lack of faith and hope, his stubbornness, his viciousness, his anger 
and attitude which is unworthy for a man. He apologizes for what he once did not understand, for 
which you would not understand...' 

'Impossible, that's a lie!' Ciri straightened and pulled her bangs violently back from her forehead. 
'You're making it up!' 

'Apologizes for what he understood only now.' Dandelion stared at the sky and his voice began to 
take the proper rhythm for ballads. 'For he wants to understand, but is afraid that he does not have 
time... And what they have he'll never understand. He apologizes and asks for forgiveness... Hmm, 
hmm... Meaning ... Conscience... Purpose? All trivial, shit...' 

'That's not true!' Ciri stamped her foot. 'Geralt doesn't say those things! He... doesn't say 
anything. I saw him, he stand with her silently...' 


'This is the task of poetry, Ciri. Speaking of what other would keep silent.' 

'What a silly task. And you made it up!' 

'This is also the task of poetry. Hey, I hear voices coming from the pond. Quickly, take a look at 
what is happening.' 

'Geralt' Ciri said, eye again peering through the hole in the wall, 'stands with his head lowered. 
And Yennefer is yelling at him horribly. Yelling and waving her arms. Oh... What does this mean?' 

'Child's play' Dandelion again stared at the clouds floating in the sky. 'Now it is she who is 
apologizing to him.' 

 


'I take thee to my wedded wife, to have and to holde from this day forwarde, for better, for wurse, 
for richer, for poorer, in sickenes, and in health, to love and to cherishe, til death us departe.' 

iaiii 

Old marriage vows 

 

We don't know much about love. Love is like a pear: it's sweet and it has a distinct shape. Try to 
define the shape of a pear. 

Dandelion, Half a century of poetry 

 

 

