Chapter Seven

The children, who surrounded the wandering storyteller called Pogwizd, expressed their protest by raising an indescribable uproar.
Finally, Connor, son of the blacksmith and the largest, strongest and boldest who had brought the storyteller a bowl of cabbage soup and some potatoes seasoned with bacon, was made the spokesperson and expressed the common opinion.
'How is this so?' he yelled.
'How is this so, grandfather? How can this be the end for today? Is it proper to end a story like that? Half way through the story? We want to know what happened! We do not want to wait until you come back to the village, because it may be six months or a year away! Say on!' 'The sun has set,' said the old man.
'It is your bed time, sparrows.
What will your parents say when they catch you yawning tomorrow while you work? I know what they'll say: Again the old storyteller has been telling you his stories, putting romances into the heads of kids and not letting them sleep.
When he reappears he will get nothing, no soup or potatoes or bacon, we'll drive this old man out of town because his stories only bring trouble...' 'They will not say that!' the children cried in chorus.
'Tell us more, please!' 'Hmmmm,' said the old man, looking at the sun disappearing behind the treetops on the edge of the Yaruga River.
'So be it.
But let us come to an agreement: Let one of you go to your house and bring me some buttermilk to wet my throat with.
The rest of you will decide the fate of what you will hear, because I cannot tell them all, we would be here until tomorrow.
So, you decide: who do we hear about now and who next time.' The boys raised a shout again, one above the other.
'Silence!' Pogwizd cried, waving his staff.
'I said to decide, not screech like nightingales, ret-tret, ret-tret, ret-tret! So what? What am I to tell?' 'Of Yennefer,' cried Nimue, the youngest of the listeners, who because of her height was called Thumbelina, was stroking a cat that had fallen asleep on her lap.
'Tell us about the Sorceress.
How she escaped the convent at Bald Peak in a magical way to save Ciri.
I'd love to hear it.
When I grow up, I want to become a Sorceress.' 'Certainly!' the miller's son, Bronik yelled.
'Better wipe your nose, Thumbelina because sorceresses don't teach people with snot! And you, old man, don't tell us about Yennefer, but about Ciri and the Rats, how they were going to steal...' 'Quiet,' said Connor, gloomy and thoughtful.
'You are a flock of idiots.
If we are to hear anything today, then it must be in order.
Tell us, grandfather, about the witcher and his companions and how they left the Yaruga.' 'I want to hear about Yennefer!' Nimue squeaked.
'Me too,' said Orla, her older sister.
'Of the love between her and the witcher.
How they loved one another.
But where it ends happily, grandfather.
Not where it ends in death.' 'Shut up, fool, who is interested in love stories? It's war we want, fighting!' 'About the witcher's sword!' 'About Ciri and the Rats!' 'Hold up!' Connor threatened them with his fist.
'Or I'll grab a stick and tan you all, bastards! I said in order.
Grandfather Pogwizd will tell us about the witcher and how he wandered with Dandelion, Milva...' 'Yes!' Nimue squeaked again.
'About Milva.
I want to hear about Milva! Because if the sorceresses do not want me, I'll become an archer!' 'Then we have chosen,' said Connor.
'And at the same time, grandfather has decided to take a nap; his gray head already nods...
Hey, grandfather! Do not sleep! Tell us of the Witcher Geralt, from the point where the company was leaving the Yaruga.' 'But first,' interjected Bronik, 'Tell us about all the others, grandfather, let us not be bothered by our curiosity.
What happened to them? Briefly about Yennefer and Ciri.
We can't wait until you visit our village again.
Please.' 'Yennefer,' grandfather Pogwizd chuckled, 'cast a spell and escaped from the castle on Bald Peak and splashed straight into the sea.
She found herself in the rough waves of the ocean, between sharp rocks, but she was not afraid, for it was a cinch for a magician to not drown.
She arrived on the Skellige Islands and found allies there.
Because you see, her anger was great at the wizard Vilgefortz.
She was convinced that he had kidnapped Ciri and she was determined to track him down, have her revenge and rescue Ciri.
And that's all I will tell you for now.' 'What about Ciri?' 'Ciri was with the Rats, hiding under the name of Falka.
She took to the bandit's life because, although nobody knew it then, in that girl was wickedness and cruelty, all that is wrong, which is hidden in each person, had emerged from her and gradually took advantage over the good.
Oh, it was a big mistake made by the witchers of Kaer Morhen, who taught her to kill! She, however, could not imagine that by killing, the Grim Reaper himself was on her heels.
Because the terrible Bonhart was on her trail.
It was written that they would meet, Ciri and Bonhart.
But that is a story for another time.
Now you shall hear the story about the Witcher.' The children were silent and sat in circle around the old man.
They listened.
Darkness fell.
Hemp, raspberry and mallow that grew not far from the huts were transformed suddenly into an incredibly dark forest.
What rustled inside? Was it a mouse or a terrible elf with eyes of fire? Or maybe a striga or a witch, who wants to eat the children? Is that the ox in the barn that is kicking or is it the beating hooves of war horses of the cruel invaders from a hundred years ago crossing the Yaruga? Was that a nightjar flying over the thatched rooftops or was it a bloodthirsty vampire? Or was it a beautiful enchantress flying on a magical spell towards a distant sea? 'The Witcher Geralt,' began the storyteller, 'along with his new company set off for Angren, through swamps and forests.
There were once dense forests that grew everywhere in the world, ho, ho, but now there are no such forests, except for Brokilon... The companions travelled east up the Yaruga, towards the holy places of the Black Forest.
At first they were doing well, but later, ho, ho... I'll tell you what happened next...' What followed was a tale of bygone and forgotten times.
The children listened.
*** The Witcher was sitting on a stump at the top of a cliff, from which unfolded a view of the meadows and reed beds on the banks of the Yaruga.
The sun was setting.
Cranes ascended from the wetlands, screeching and flying in a wedge.
Everything is fucked up, thought the Witcher, looking at the ruins of a woodcutter's hut and the little bit of smoke rising from a fire that Milva made.
Everything has gone to hell.
And everything was going so well, even with this strange company.
We had a target, close, real, concrete.
East through Angren to Caed Dhu.
We were doing so well.
But then it went to hell.
Bad luck or fate? The cranes blew a trumpeting call.
*** Emiel Regis Rohellec Terzieff-Godefroy rode at the head of the procession mounted on a Nilfgaardian bay captured by the Witcher in Armeria.
The stallion, although at first it was bothered by the vampire and his herbal scent, soon became accustomed and caused little trouble unlike Roach who kicked like he was being bitten by horseflies.
Behind Regis and Geralt rode Dandelion on Pegasus with his head bandaged like a war hero.
Along the way the poet had composed a heroic song, in which military rhymes and melodies resonated and was reminiscent of their recent adventures.
The shape of the work clearly suggested that during these adventures, the author of the song and performer had shown himself to be the bravest of the brave.
The procession was capped off by Milva and Cahir Mawr Dyffryn aep Ceallach.
Cahir was riding his recovered horse and led by the bridle a gray horse loaded with their modest equipment.
At last they left the riverside wetlands and found themselves on dry lands covered with hills from which they could see to the south the Great Yaruga as a shiny ribbon and to the north in the distance, the Mahakam Mountains.
The weather was beautiful, the sun warmed them and the mosquitoes ceased to poke and buzz around their ears.
Boots and legs dried.
On the sunny slopes blackberry bushes were dark with fruit, the horses nibbled at the grass, the brooks that ran down to meet with the Yaruga were crystal clear and full of trout.
As night fell, it was possible to light a fire and sleep warm and dry.
In a word, it was wonderful, and moods should have improved immediately.
But they did not.
And the reason why was proved at one of the first camps.
*** 'Wait a moment, Geralt,' the poet began, looking around.
'Don't be in such a rush to get back to camp.
We want to talk to you in private, here, me and Milva.
It's ...Well, about Regis.' 'Aha,' The Witcher lay down his arm full of brushwood.
'You're starting to be afraid? It is about time.' 'Shut up,' Dandelion raised his eyebrows.
'We have accepted him as a companion; he has offered his support to help find Ciri.
He pulled my own neck out of the noose, I will not forget that.
But, don't be surprised that we have concerns, damn it.
Are you surprised? All your life you have persecuted and killed those like him.' 'I have not killed him.
Nor do I have any intentions too.
Is this declaration sufficient for you? If not, though sorrow fills my heart, I am unable to cure your fear.
It's paradoxical but the only one among us who can cure you is Regis.' 'I told you to shut up,' the troubadour said angrily.
'You are not talking to Yennefer, save us you twisted eloquence.
Just answer directly to a simple question.' 'Ask them.
Without twisted eloquence.' 'Regis is a vampire.
It's no secret what vampires feed on.
What will happen when he gets really hungry? Yes, yes, we saw that he ate fish soup and since then he has eaten with us, as normally as any of us.
But... But will he be able to control his desire? Geralt, do I have to pry it out of you?' 'He controlled his lust for blood when he was tending to your head wound.
When we were tied up, he did not even lick his fingers.
And then, during the full moon, when we were drunk on mandrake liquor and slept in his hut, he had a unique opportunity.
Did you check and see if you have teeth marks on your neck?' 'Do not mock,' Milva snorted.
'You know more about vampires than us.
You can mock, Dandelion, but you must answer me.
I grew up in the mountains, I didn't go to schools, and I'm in the dark.
It is not my fault and not right to mock.
I ashamed to admit it, but I am a little bit afraid of... Regis.' 'And not without reason,' he nodded.
'He is one of the so-called higher vampires.
Extremely dangerous.
If he was our enemy, I'd be afraid as well.
But, the plague, for reasons unknown to me, he is our companion.
He leads us to Caed Dhu, to the druids who can help me obtain information about Ciri.
I'm desperate and so therefore I cannot give up this chance.
And so I accept the friendship of a vampire.' 'Is that the only reason?' 'No,' he said with a slight reluctance, but finally opted for honesty.
'Not just that.
He... He behaves honourably.
In the camp by the Chotla, at the judgement of the girl, he did not hesitate to act.
Although he knew that it would expose him.' 'He pulled a red-hot horseshoe out of the fire,' Dandelion recalled.
'He held it in his hands for a few moments and did not even wince.
None of us could repeat that act, not even with baked potatoes.' 'He is impervious to fire.' 'What else can he do?' 'He can become invisible whenever he wants.
He can hypnotize you with his eyes, inducing a deep sleep; he did it to the guard in Vissegerd's camp.
He can take the form and fly like a bat.
I think that these things can only be performed at night and only during a full moon.
But I could be wrong.
I've already been surprised a few times, and he might have something else up his sleeve.
I suspect that he is unusual even among vampires.
For years he has quite convincingly posed as a human.
Dogs and horses can perceive his true nature but can be tricked by the smell of herbs that he always carries.
But my medallion didn't react to him, and it should have.
I repeat he cannot be measured by the standard measure.
You will have to ask him about the rest of it.
He is our companion; there should be no misunderstanding between us or mutual mistrust and fear.
Let us return to camp.
Help me with the wood.' 'Geralt?' 'I'm listening, Dandelion.' 'If... Well, I was wondering, theoretically... If...' 'I honestly don't know,' he replied sincerely.
'I don't know if I could kill him.
I would rather not have to try.' *** Dandelion took the witcher's advice to heart and decided to clarify the ambiguities and dispel the doubts.
He did so as soon as they set out on their journey.
He did so with his characteristic tact.
'Milva!' he cried out suddenly while riding, squinting at the vampire.
'You should move ahead with your bow and see if your arrows can take down a deer or a stag.
I've had enough, by the plague, of eating blackberries and mushrooms, and fish and clams from the river.
I could eat real meat for a change.
What do you say, Regis?' 'What?' the vampire said raising his head from the neck of his horse.
'Meat!' repeated the poet emphatically.
'I'm encouraging Milva to hunt something.
Do you eat fresh meat?' 'I eat it.' 'And blood, do you drink fresh blood?' 'Blood?' Regis swallowed.
'No.
In the case of blood, no.
But if you fancy it, do not hesitate.' Geralt, Milva and Cahir observed the exchange in silence, as heavy as a tomb.
'I know what you are doing, Dandelion,' Regis said slowly.
'And let me reassure you.
I'm a vampire, yes.
But I do not drink blood.' The silence was a heavy as lead.
But Dandelion being Dandelion did not remain silent.
'Maybe you misunderstood me,' he said with apparently blithely.
'I do not refer...' 'I do not drink blood,' Regis interrupted.
'For a long time now.
I lost the habit.' 'How is it that you lost the habit?' 'The usual way.' 'I really don't understand...' 'Sorry, it is a personal matter.' 'But...' 'Dandelion,' the Witcher could not stand it anymore and turned in his saddle.
'Regis has just told you to fuck off.
He just put it politely.
Be courteous and finally close your mouth.' *** However, the seeds of uncertainty and insecurity had been planted.
When they stopped for the night, the atmosphere was still heavy and tense and was not even lightened by Milva who had caught a fat, river goose, weighing nearly eight pounds.
They covered it in mud, roasted and ate it, chewing on the bones and not leaving even the smallest crumb.
Their hunger was sated but the anxiety remained.
The conversation curdled despite Dandelion's titanic efforts.
The talk of the poet became a monologue, which even he finally noticed and shut up.
Only the sound of the horses chewing hay disturbed the silence that surrounded the fire like a cemetery.
Despite the late hour, no one seemed inclined to go to sleep.
Milva heated water in a pot hung over the fire and used the steam to straighten the fletching on her arrows that were wrinkled.
Cahir was repairing a broken boot buckle.
Geralt was carving a stick.
And Regis ran his eyes over each of them in order.
'Well, well,' He said finally.
'I see that this is inevitable.
It seems that I should have explained some things to you a long time ago...' 'Nobody is forcing you,' Geralt threw a long and carefully carved piece of wood into the fire and raised his head.
'I do not need your explanations.
I'm the old-fashioned type, when someone extends their hand to me; I accept them as a companion and that means more to me that a contract signed in the presence of a notary.' 'I too am old-fashioned.' Cahir said, still bent over his boot.
'I do not know there was a new fashion,' Milva said dryly, placing another arrow in the steam the rose from the pot.
'Do not worry about Dandelion's chatter,' added the witcher.
'He doesn't.
You do not need to confide or to explain.
We also don't need to confide in you.' 'I suppose, however,' the vampire smiled slightly, 'you will hear what I need to say without being forced.
I feel the need to be sincere with the people to whom I have extended my hand and accepted as companions.' This time no one spoke.
'I'll begin by saying,' he said after a moment's hesitation, 'that the fears surrounding my vampire nature are completely unfounded.
I will not throw myself onto anybody at night and sink my teeth into their neck while they sleep.
And it is not only my companions to whom I have a relationship with, it is all others.
I do not drink blood.
Never.
I weaned myself off of it when it became a problem for me.
A serious problem, that was not easy to solve.' 'The problem,' he took a moment, 'emerged and took on all the characteristics on a truly bad textbook, early in my younger years, I loved...
hmmm...
to party in good company, moreover, I was not different in this respect from most of my peers.
You know how it is when you're young.
But among you there is a system of prohibitions and restrictions – parental authority, guardians, superiors and elders, and finally, custom.
Among us there is not.
Young people have complete freedom and were using it.
I created my own behavioural patterns, stupid, of course, truly youthful stupidity.
"You don't drink? What kind of vampire are you? He does not drink? Do not invite him, he'll spoil the fun!" I did not want to spoil the fun and the possible loss of social acceptance frightened me.
So I partied.
Revelry and playfulness, libation and drunkenness, every full moon we flew to a village and we drank until full.
The quality was disgusting, the worst kind of...
liquid.
We did not care who we drank from as long as they was...
haemoglobin...
without blood there was no fun! A vampire did not have boldness if he wouldn't drink.' Regis was silent, engulfed in thought.
Nobody said anything.
Geralt felt terrible that he wanted a drink.
'Each time I became more savage,' the vampire continued.
'And as time went on I was getting worse.
Sometimes when we went on a spree we did not return to the crypt for three nights.
A ridiculous amount of liquid one time...
made me lose control, which did not hamper the party.
But friends, being friends.
Some friends tried to caution moderation so I insulted them.
Others urged me from the crypt to go carousing, as well as offering...
objects.
They laughed at my expense.' Milva, who was still occupied in fixing the deformed arrows, muttered angrily.
Cahir finished fixing his boots and gave the impression that he was sleeping.
'Later,' Regis went on, 'I started developing alarming symptoms.
The fun and companionship started to play a secondary role.
I noticed that I could do without them.
What became important to me was the just the blood.' 'Did you feel too bad to look in the Mirror?' Dandelion asked.
'I don't reflect in mirrors.' Regis said calmly.
He was silent for a while.
'I met a certain...
vampire.
It could have been – and probably was – something serious.
I stopped losing control.
But not for long.
She left me and I began to drink even more.
Disappointment and grief, as you know, is a great alibi.
I was looking for justification for my behaviour, and it was the perfect excuse.
Everyone seemed to understand.
Even I thought I understood.
And I matched the theory to practice.
Am I boring you? I won't be much longer.
I began at last to do things intolerable, totally unacceptable such as no vampire does.
I started to fly while intoxicated.
One night the boys sent me to a village after blood and I passed a girl who had gone to the well for water and struck a wall and was knocked unconscious...
The peasants almost killed me, luckily they did not know how.
They pierced me with stakes, cut off my head, sprinkled holy water on me and buried me.
Can you imagine how I felt when I woke up?' 'I can imagine,' Milva said looking at an arrow.
Everyone looked at her strangely.
The Archer cleared her throat and turned her head.
Regis smiled slightly.
'I am finishing,' he said.
'In the grave I had enough time to reflect on things...' 'Enough?' Geralt asked.
'How much?' Regis looked at him.
'Professional curiosity? Approximately fifty years.
When I had regenerated, I decided to get myself together.
It was not easy but I managed too.
Since then, I do not drink.' 'Nothing?' Dandelion said with curiosity, 'Nothing? Never? But if...' 'Dandelion,' Geralt raised his eyebrows slightly.
'Control yourself.
And think, in silence.' 'Sorry,' grunted the poet.
'Don't apologize,' the vampire said in a conciliatory tone, 'And you Geralt, don't rebuke him.
I understand the curiosity.
I or it is better to say, me and my myth, embody all the human fears.
It is difficult to ask a man to cut through his fears.
Fear plays a part in the human psyche that is no less important than other emotional states.
A psyche devoid of fear is a cripple psyche.' 'Imagine,' Dandelion said, recovering his composure, 'that I woke up without fear.
Would I be a cripple?' Geralt for a moment thought that Regis would show his teeth and cure Dandelion of his putative disability, but he was wrong.
The vampire had no inclination for theatrical gestures.
'I have spoken of fears rooted in the consciousness and the subconscious,' he said quietly.
'Do not be bothered by the metaphor, but the crow is not afraid of the coat and hat hanging on a stick, when it settles on it in apprehension.
But when the wind stirs the fear, the crow will react by fleeing.' 'The behaviour of the crow explains the struggle for life.' Cahir pointed out from the darkness.
'The crow is smart,' Milva snorted.
'It is not afraid of a straw man, but real men, because men throw stones and shoot arrows.' 'Self-preservation,' said Geralt, 'is inherent in all living things, crows and people.
Thank you for the explanation, Regis, we accept them completely.
But don't go digging into the depths of the human subconscious.
Milva is right.
The reasons why people panic at the sight of a vampire, are not irrational, but the result of a desire to survive.' 'We hear the words of a specialist,' the vampire said bowing slightly in his direction.
'A professional, with a professional's pride, who will not take money to fight with imaginary fears.
The self-respecting Witcher is only hired to fight the evil that is real and a direct threat.
A professional who will explain to us why a vampire is a greater evil than a dragon or a wolf.
At the end of the day, the latter also have fangs.' 'Maybe it is because the latter two use their fangs out of hunger and self-defence, never for the sake of fun when they want to breaking the ice with friends or overcoming shyness towards the opposite sex?' 'People do not know about it,' Regis stopped him, 'you have known for a long time and the rest of the company only just found out.
The remaining majority are deeply convinced that vampires do not play with, but feed on blood, only the blood of humans.
Blood is a life giving fluid; its loss is associated with the weakening of the body and vitality.
Consider the following – a creature who sheds our blood is our mortal enemy.
A creature that feeds on our blood to live is monster that is doubly evil.
It increases its own vitality at the expense of our own and if their species flourish, we will die.
Finally, such a creature is disgusting, because even though we know the value of life-giving blood, it is repugnant to us.
Would any of you drink blood? I doubt it.
And some people become dizzy and faint just at the sight of blood.
In some communities for a few days a month, women are considered unclear and isolated...' 'I think among the barbarians,' Cahir interrupted, 'And fainting at the sight of blood, is probably only among you Nordlings.' 'We have strayed,' the Witcher raised his head, 'we are deviating from the straight path into the thicket of dubious philosophy.
Do you think, Regis that people would react differently if they knew that you were treating them, not as prey, but as a pub? Where do you see irrational fears? Vampire suck blood from humans, that fact cannot be undermined.
Humans who are treated by vampires like demijohns of vodka, lose strength.
A man, so to speak, drained also loses vitality.
And generally dies.
Sorry, but the fear of death cannot be packaged into the same sack as losing blood.
Menstrual or other.' 'You talk so cleverly in circles that my head is spinning.' Milva snorted.
'And yet with all this wisdom you still revolve around to what is under a woman's skirt.
Fucking philosophers.' 'Let us leave for a moment the symbolism of blood,' said Regis.
'Because the myths actually have some justification in facts.
Let's focus on myths, grounded in fact that they don't have, and yet are widespread.
After all, everyone knows that being bitten by a vampire, if you survive, makes you become a vampire.
True?' 'True,' Dandelion said.
'There was a ballad...' 'Do you know basic arithmetic?' 'I studied all seven of the liberal arts.
And I received a degree summa cum laude.' 'In your world, after the Conjunction of the Spheres there were about two thousand two hundred higher vampires.
The total abstainers, such as I am now, far outweigh the number of those who drink to excess – as I once did.
So on average every vampire drinks at every full moon, because the full moon to us is a celebration, which we used to drink...
Let's bring this to a human calendar and accept that there are twelve full moons in the year that leaves us with a theoretical figure of fourteen thousand people bitten each year.
Since the Conjunction, again counting by your reckoning of time, it has been about fifteen hundred years.
From the result of simple multiplication it shows that at present there should theoretically exist in your world twenty-one million six hundred vampires.
However the increase in vampires would have to increase geometric rather than arithmetic...' 'Enough,' Dandelion sighed.
'I have no abacus, but I can imagine the number.
Or rather, I cannot imagine.
This means that the contagion of vampirism is nonsense and fantasy.' 'Thank you,' Regis bowed.
'Moving onto the next myth, which states – the vampire is a human being who died, but not quite.
In the grave it does not rot, nor turn to dust.
It lies in the grave fresh and ruddy, ready climb out and go out biting.
Where does this myth come from, if not from your subconscious and irrational aversion to the venerable dead? You remember your dead and honour their memory, you dream of immortality, in your myths and legends every now and again someone is raised from the dead.
But if you late venerable grandfather suddenly left his tomb and asked you for a beer, a panic would arise.
And no wonder.
The body, in which life has ceased to exist, is subjected to decay, rotting and smells.
The immortal spirit, an indispensable element of you myths, abandons the stinking carrion in disgust and flies away.
It is clean and you can safely worship it.
But imagine a disgusting spirit that doesn't fly away, does not leave the corpse.
It is disgusting and unnatural! The living dead are for you disgusting anomalies.
Some moron even coined the term "undead" which we so eagerly bestow.' 'People,' Geralt smiled slightly, 'as a race are primitive and superstitious.
It is difficult for them to understand and properly term a being that rises, even though their head had been cut off and had been buried underground for fifty years.' 'They cannot?' the mockery did not affect the vampire.
'People can regenerate hair, skin, nails, but they are unable to accept the fact that there are races that are in this respect far superior.
This inability does not stem from being primitive.
On the contrary, it comes from the self-centeredness and conviction of their own perfection.
Something that is more perfect than you must be a disgusting aberration.
And disgusting aberrations shall be handed down as myths.
For sociological purposes.' 'I understand shit all of this,' Milva said calmly, brushing aside hair from her forehead with the shaft of an arrow.
'But what I do understand is that you talk about fairy tales and fables, even some that I know.
Even though I'm just a silly girl from the forest.
But what amazes me most about you Regis, is that you don't have any fear of the sun.
In fairy tales when a vampire is hit by the sun light they turn to ashes.
Is this also just a fable?' 'As most do,' confirmed Regis,' you believe that a vampire is only dangerous at night, and when the first rays of the sun touch him he turns to ash.
The basis of this myth, which was probably already being told by your ancestors around the camp fires, lies in the sun, or rather, your love for the heat and the daily rhythm that daytime activities require.
For you the night is cold, dark, evil, menacing and full of dangers; however the sunrise means a new victory in the struggle for survival, a new day, the continuation of existence.
Sunlight brings clarity and warmth, the sun's rays give life and must bring destruction to your monstrous enemies.
Vampires crumble to ash, trolls are turned to stone, the werewolf looses its wolf form and the goblin runs to its cave covering its eyes.
The nocturnal beasts return to their lairs and stop threatening you.
Until sunset, the world belongs to you.
I repeat and emphasize – the myth was created by the ancient camp fires.
Today it is indeed a mere myth, because in your homes you have heating and light – you've mastered the night.
We, higher vampires, have also wandered away from our traditional crypts.
We have mastered the day.
The analogy is complete.
Are you satisfied with the explanation, Milva?' 'Not much,' The Archer retrieved another arrow.
'But I think I understand.
I am learning.
Sociology, myths, werewolves.
They teach this in schools with a cane.
With you it is more delightful.
My head hurts, but at least my ass doesn't.' 'One thing is not in doubt and is easy to see' said Dandelion.
'The rays of the sun do not turn you to ash, Regis, the sun's heat affects you about as much as that horseshoe.
The one you pulled from the fire with your bare hand.
Going back to your analogy, however, for us humans, the day will always be the natural time of activity and the night the natural time to sleep.
This is our physical makeup, for example, in the day we see better than at night.
The exception is Geralt, who see just as well in both of them, but he is a mutant.
For vampires is it also a case of mutation?' 'You could say that,' accepted Regis.
'Although I believe that mutation spread over a sufficiently long period ceases being a mutation and becomes evolution.
But what you said about the physical structure is relevant.
Adapting to the sunlight for us was an unpleasant necessity.
To survive we had to become similar in that respect to people.
Mimicry, I would say.
It did have is consequences.
We used the metaphor – I'm going to bed sick.' 'What?' 'There are grounds to think that sunlight is deadly in the long run.
There are theories that in about five thousand years, counting modestly, this world will only be inhabited by nocturnal creatures.' 'I'm glad, that I will not live to see it,' Cahir sighed, and then yawned heavily.
'I don't know about you, but these conversations about daily activities remind me that I need to sleep.' 'Me too,' the Witcher stretched.
'The murderous sun will be rising in a few hours.
But before then we need sleep...
Regis, in the context of school and learning, dispel yet another myth about vampires.
Because I bet that you still have some.' 'Yes,' the vampire nodded.
'Just one.
Last but equally important.
It is a myth which you have dictated your sexual phobias.' Cahir snorted softly.
'I have left this myth until the end,' Regis measured him with his eyes, 'and I myself, would tactfully not have touched on it had Geralt not challenged me, so I won't spare you.
In Humans the strongest cause of anxiety is sexual.
The virgin fainting in the embrace of the bloodsucking vampire, or the youngster exposed to the insolent mouth of the vampire, wandering over their naked body.
As you can imagine.
Oral rape.
The vampire paralyzes its victim with fear and forces her to perform oral sex.
Or rather a hideous parody of oral sex.
And as this sex excludes procreation, it is detestable.' 'Speak for yourself.' The Witcher muttered.
'An act that does not lead to procreation but to pleasure and death,' continued Regis.
'You have made into an evil myth.
Many men and women secretly want something similar, and yet are reluctant to provide their partner with anything but the generally accepted sexual stereotype.
So we do it for you in this vampire mythology and thus it grows into a fascinating symbol of evil.' 'Did I not tell you?' Milva cried at the same moment that Regis had finished explaining to Dandelion.
'It's always the same! They begin with wisdom and always end up between a girl's legs!' *** The cries of the cranes gradually disappeared into the distance.
The next day, the Witcher recalled, in a much improved mood we set out on the trail.
And then, quite unexpectedly the war caught us again.
*** They travel through deep forests and uninhabitable regions without strategic importance, unattractive to invaders.
Although Nilfgaard was near, separated only by the Yaruga River, they did not anticipate meeting enemy forces.
The greater was their surprise.
The war here, appeared less spectacular than in Brugge and Sodden, where at night the horizon glowed with fire and during the day black plumes of smoke covered the sky.
Here in Angren, it was not so spectacular.
It was worse.
Suddenly they saw a flock of crows, croaking and wildly circling above the forest and they soon came upon the corpses.
Although stripped of their clothes it was impossible to identify the bodies which bore clear signs of very violent deaths.
These people had been killed in battle.
And not only that.
Most of the corpses were lying in the bushes, but some were gruesomely mutilated, hung by the arms or legs on tree branches, or their charred forms had been fixed to stakes.
All of them stank.
All of Angren suddenly began to smell with the stench of foul and hideous barbarity.
It did not take long until they had to hide in the thickets and brush because to the right and left, ahead and behind the earth resounded with the beating hooves of cavalry horses, and more and more troops passed their hiding place, raising clouds of dust.
*** 'Again,' Dandelion shook his head.
'Again, we do not know who is fighting whom and why.
Again, we do not know who is behind us and who is ahead of us, or who is in the direction we are going.
Who is on the offensive, and who is in retreat.
Let the plague take it all! I don't remember if I told you this already, but I say that war is always reminiscent of a brothel on fire...' 'You've told us,' interrupted Geralt, 'a few hundred times.' 'Why are they fighting here?' the Poet spat.
'Over the junipers and strawberries? Because this country does not have anything else!' 'Among the dead lying in the bushes,' said Milva, 'were elves.
Scoia'tael commandos travel through here, they have always done so.
The trails here lead from Dol Blathanna and the Blue Mountains and stretch through to Temeria.
Someone is trying to block the trails, I think.' 'It is not impossible,' Regis admitted, 'that the Temerian army is hunting for Squirrels here.
But I think there are too many soldiers around here.
I suspect that the Nilfgaardians have finally crossed the Yaruga.' 'That's what I suspect,' the Witcher grimaced slightly, looking at Cahir's stony face.
'The corpses we saw this morning, showed signs of the Nilfgaardian method of warfare.' 'Some others are no better.' Milva growled, coming to the young Nilfgaardians defence.
'And do not look askance at Cahir, for both of you share the same fate.
To him, death if he falls under the feet of the Black ones, and you have recently just escaped a Temerian noose.
It is therefore vain to dwell on which army is in front of us or behind, it doesn't matter what colours they wear.
They are now all our enemies.' 'You are right.' *** 'Interesting,' Dandelion said the next day while they were in the bushes waiting for more riders to pass.
'The army gallops through the woods and the earth rumbles, but down there near the Yaruga I can hear axes.
Woodcutters cut down the forest as if nothing has happened.
Do you hear?' 'This may not be woodcutters,' Cahir pondered.
'May be it is also the army? Some sappers?' 'No it's woodcutters,' Regis said.
'Clearly, nothing can stop the exploitation of Angren's gold.' 'What gold?' 'Look at the trees,' the vampire once again assumed the tone of the superior all-knowing sage of the uneducated children.
A tone that he used quite often, which annoyed Geralt.
'These trees,' Regis repeated, 'cedars, oaks and Angren pines.
They are extremely valuable material.
On the banks you can see the woodcutter's camps; from there the logs are transported downstream.
Everywhere they are felling trees and axes clatter day and night.
The war, which we see and hear, starts to make sense.
Nilfgaard, as you know, has conquered the mouth of the Yaruga, Cintra, Verden and Upper Sodden.
At this time, it is also likely Brugge and part of Lower Sodden.
This means that that wood is being floated down from Angren to the imperial sawmills and shipyards.
The Northern Kingdoms are trying to stop the transport, on the other hand the Nilfgaardians are interested in ensuring the logging and transport continues undisturbed.
' 'And we, as usual, are out of luck,' Dandelion nodded.
'Because we need to get to Caed Dhu, and the path leads straight through Angren, the focus of the timber wars.
Damn, is there another way?' *** The same question, recalled the Witcher, staring at the sun setting over the Yaruga, I asked Regis once the thud of hooves ceased in the distance and we were finally able to continue on our way.
*** 'Another way to Caed Dhu?' the vampire looked thoughtful.
'To avoid the armies, but also not go through the hills? Yes, there is a way.
It is not very comfortable or safe.
And it is longer.
But I guarantee you that we will not find any armies there.' 'Speak.' 'We turn south and try and cross the depression in the meandering Yaruga.
To Ysgith.
Do you know about Ysgith, Witcher?' 'I know.' 'Have you ever gone through there?' 'Yes.' 'There is serenity in your voice,' the vampire cleared his throat, 'that seems to indicate that you accept the idea.
Well, there are five of us, including a Witcher, a warrior and an archer.
Experience, two swords and a bow.
Not enough to face a Nilfgaardian patrol, but it should suffice for Ysgith.' Ysgith, thought the Witcher.
Thirty square miles of swamps and marshes, dotted with lakes and eyelets.
Where on the shores of the lakes, strange trees grow.
Some have trunks covered with scales at the base which are bulbous and thin as they go upwards, towards a flat and dense crown.
Others are small and crooked, twisted piles sitting on octopus-like roots and from their bare limbs hang beards of moss and lichen.
The lichen is constantly moving, but not from the wind, but the poisonous marsh gas.
Ysgith, or as it is more accurately known by its other name "Harrier".
And among the mud, swamps, pond and lagoons in duckweed-covered rivers and wetland vegetation, it is seething with life.
It is not only inhabited by beavers, frogs, turtles and waterfowl.
Ysgith is full of wild beasts far more dangerous, armed with claws, tentacles and prehensile limbs, with which they catch, maim, drown and tear apart.
These creatures are so many that no one has ever managed to get to know and classify them all.
Not even the witchers.
He himself had seldom hunted in Ysgith and in general the Lower Angren.
The country was sparsely populated; the few people who lived on the edges of the swamp were used to the monsters and treated them as landscape elements.
They respected them, and they seldom thought of hiring a witcher to fight them.
Rarely, but not never.
Geralt, therefore knew Ysgith and its horrors.
Two swords and a bow, the thought.
And my experience and training as a witcher.
Going as a group should work.
Especially if I lead in the forefront and keep an eye on everything.
On rotten trunks, piles of weeds, bushes, clumps of grass, plants, even orchids.
Because in Ysgith sometimes what looks like a normal orchid can actually turn out to be a poisonous crab spider.
Dandelion will need to be watched to make sure he doesn't touch anything.
There are plenty of plants that would like to supplement their diets with pieces of meat.
Those whose branches that come in contact with the skin work as effectively as crab spider venom.
And we must not forget the swamp gas.
A poisonous vapour.
We'll have to think about something to cover the mouth and nose.
'Well?' Regis pulled him from his thoughts.
'Do you agree?' 'I agree.
Let's go.' *** Something prompted me then, the Witcher recalled, not to say anything to the rest of the company about the idea of crossing Ysgith.
And to not even ask Regis about it.
Not even I know why.
Today when everything is fucked up, I could persuade myself that I paid attention to the behaviour of Milva.
To the problems that she had.
To her obvious symptoms.
But it would not be true.
I noticed nothing, and what I did noticed, I underestimated.
Like an idiot.
And we kept heading east, hesitating in entering the swamps.
On the on the hand, it is well that we did hesitate, he thought taking the sword and running his thumb down the metal, sharp as a razor blade.
If we had entered Ysgith immediately, today I would not have this weapon.
*** Since dawn they had not seen or heard any troops.
Milva led the way, far ahead of the rest of the company.
Regis, Dandelion and Cahir talked.
'I hope your druids will help in the matter of Ciri.' worried the poet.
'I meet druids occasionally, and believe me, they are usually recluses.
They might not want to talk to us, let alone use magic.' 'Regis,' reminded the Witcher, 'knows someone among those of Caed Dhu.' 'And this knowledge doesn't go back three or four hundred years?' 'It is far more recent,' the vampire said with an enigmatic smile.
'In any case, druids are long-lived.
They constantly stay out in the air, among the primal and unspoiled nature, and this has great influences on their health.
Breathe a lung full of air, Dandelion, fill your lungs with forest air, and you'll also be healthy.' 'From this forest air,' Dandelion said with a sneer, 'I'm going to start growing hair on my body, the plague.
At night I dream of taverns, beer and bathrooms.
And the primal nature can go to the primal devil, and I also doubt its beneficial influence on health, especially mental.
The mentioned druids are the best example, because they are bizarre and unusual.
They are absolutely crazy in regards to nature and its defence.
Several times I have been there when they have delivered petitions to rulers, demanding a ban on hunting, cutting down trees, don't throw rubbish into the rivers and similar nonsense.
And the height of stupidity was when a delegate submitted himself wearing only mistletoe to King Ethain of Cidaris.
I was there then...' 'What did he want?' Geralt said with interest.
'Cidaris, as you know, is one of the kingdoms in which the majority of the population make a living from fishing.
The druid demanded that the king order the fishermen to use nets with a large mesh and to strictly punish those who would fish with nets smaller than those ordered.
Ethain's jaw dropped when the man in mistletoe made it clear that this was the only way to protect the fish stock from depletion.
The king led him to the terrace, and showed him the sea and told how his bravest sailor once sailed westward for two months and came back because they ran out of fresh water on the ship and on the horizon there was no sign of land.
Did he, he asked the druid, imagine that the stocks could be exhausted from such a sea? Of course, confirmed the druid in mistletoe, fishing will be the last chance of mankind to obtain food from nature, there will come a time when the fish run out and there is hunger in the eyes of the people.
It is therefore necessary to fish with nets made with larder meshes, to catch the larger fish and protect the smaller fry.
Ethain asked the druid, when, according to the druid, will this terrible time of hunger come, and the druid replied, not for two thousand years, according to their forecasts.
The king dismissed him and politely asked him to come through here in a few thousand years and then he would think about it.
The druid did not understand the joke and began to object, so they threw him out of town.' 'All druids are alike,' confirmed Cahir.
'We, the Nilfgaardians...' 'I gotcha!' Dandelion cried triumphantly.
'We, the Nilfgaardians! Only yesterday, when I called you a Nilfgaardian you jumped like you had been stung by a wasp.
See if you can decide, Cahir, who you are.' 'To you,' Cahir shrugged, 'I am a Nilfgaardian, and I can see I'm not going to convince you otherwise.
However, to be accurate, know that such a name in the Empire is only entitled to the indigenous inhabitants of the capital and the surrounding area, located along the lower basin of the Alba.
My family comes from Vicovaro and therefore...' 'Shut your mouth!' Milva ordered sharply with little courtesy, who was at the forefront.
Everyone immediately fell silent and halted the horses, as they had been taught when the girl saw, heard or felt not only danger, but also something they could eat if it was possible to approach it and hit it with an arrow.
Milva indeed prepared her bow, but jumped from the saddle.
So she was not hunting.
Geralt approached with caution.
'Smoke,' she said tersely.
'I don't see it.' 'Use your nose.' The Archer's sense of smell was not mistaken, but the smell of smoke was barely noticeable.
It could not be smoke from a fire or conflagration.
This smoke, Geralt thought, smells nice.
It came from a fire, which was baking something.
'Will we avoid it?' Milva asked softly.
'First let's take a look,' he said getting off his horse and handing the reins to Dandelion.
'Better to know what we are avoiding.
And who it is behind us.
Come with me.
The rest of you stay in your saddles.
Be alert.' In a thicket on the edge of the forest a stretched a view of a hill with logs placed in piles around it.
A fine ribbon of smoke rose from the logs.
Geralt calmed down a bit – in sight nothing moved and between the logs was not enough space to be able to hide a large group.
Milva noticed it to.
'There are no horses,' she whispered.
'It is not the army.
I'd guess woodcutters.' 'Me too.
But I'll go check.
Cover me.' While approaching, carefully dodging between piles of tree trunk, he heard voices.
He moved closer.
And was greatly surprised.
But his hearing did not deceive him.
'Double clubs!' 'Stack of diamonds!' 'Screwed!' 'Raise.
Hearts! Oh m...' 'Ha, ha, ha! A jack and a runt! Before you take a good shit you have to mount a heap!' 'I'll put down the jack! Hey, Yazon, you have sunk like a duck's ass!' 'Why not put down the lady, you bastard? I picked up a spade...' The Witcher might have still remained cautious, after all Screwed could be played by many different people and many different people have the name Yazon.
However, above the excited voices of the players was a well known hoarse croak.
'Rrrraaaa...
motherfuckers!' 'Greetings, boys,' Geralt said as he came out from behind a pile of logs.
'I'm glad to see you alive and healthy.
Even with the parrot.' 'Damn it!' Zoltan Chivay dropped his cards in surprise, after which he jumped to his feet so suddenly that Field Marshal Duda, who was on his shoulder, flapped his wings and shrieked with terror.
'The Witcher has found us! Or is he a mirage? Percival, do you see what I'm seeing?' Percival Schuttenbach, Munro Bruys, Yazon Varda and Figgis Merluzzo surrounded Geralt and patted and hugged him.
And when the rest of the company emerged from behind the piles of logs, the shouts of delight intensified accordingly.
'Milva! Regis!' Zoltan shouted, squeezing all.
'Dandelion, alive, albeit with a bandage on his head! And what do you have to say about this melodramatic cliché? Life, is not poetry! And you know why? Because it is not subjected to criticism!' 'And where is Caleb Stratton?' Dandelion said looking around.
Zoltan and the other fell silent and suddenly became serious.
'Caleb,' the dwarf said at last, inhaling through his nose, 'lies under the ground next to a birch tree, away from his beloved mountain peaks and coal.
When we were caught by the Black ones at the Ina, he moved his feet too slowly and did not reach the forest...
They struck him in the head with a sword and when he fell they pierced him with pikes.
Come now, do not be sad, we have already mourned, it is enough.
Better to be happy.
You however, escaped the riot in the camp.
You have even increased the size of your company, I see.' Cahir bowed slightly under the watchful gaze of the dwarf and said nothing.
'Well, sit down,' invited Zoltan.
'We are roasting a lamb here.
We found it a few days ago, lonely and sad, we gave it a good death, and it won't die of hunger or end up in the clutches of a wolf, we were compassionate and slit her throat.
Please sit down.
And you, Regis, please come to this side for a moment and you to Geralt.' Behind a pile of logs, two women were sitting.
The younger of them was nursing a baby and she turned away shyly at seeing them approaching.
Nearby, on the sand with a pair of children played a young girl with a bandage of dirty bandage on her hand.
The witcher knew her at once and met her hazy, indifferent eyes.
'We untied her from the wagon that was already burning,' said the dwarf.
'In the end the stubborn priest ended up like the one he hated so much.
He underwent a baptism of fire.
The flames burned the flesh of her hand.
We have treated it the best that we could, smearing it with lard, but it somehow keeps filling with pus.
Surgeon, if you could...' 'Immediately.' When Regis went to unfold the dressing, the girl wailed, leaning back and covering her face with her good hand.
Geralt came over to hold her, but the vampire restrained him with a gesture.
He looked deeply into the eyes of the girl and she immediately calmed down.
Her head fell slightly onto her chest.
She did not even flinch when Regis carefully peeled off the dirty rags and rubbed her scorched arm with a strangely scented ointment.
Geralt turned his head and looked at the two women with the two children and then at the dwarf.
Zoltan grunted.
'The women,' he explained in an undertone, 'we found wandering here in the Angren.
They were lost during their flight, they were alone, frightened and hungry, so we offered to accompany them.
It just came out.' 'It just came out,' Geralt repeated, smiling slightly.
'You are an incorrigible altruist, Zoltan Chivay.' 'Every person is defective.
You, you're still looking to rush to a girl's rescue.' 'I still do.
Although the issue is complicated.' 'By this Nilfgaardian who used to follow you, but is now part of your company?' 'Partially.
Zoltan, where are the refugees? Who ran away? Away from the Nilfgaardians and the Squirrels?' 'It is hard to guess.
The kids do not know shit; the girls are not very talkative and are afraid of something.
Blaspheme before them, and they turn red as beets like these...
Never mind.
But we encountered other fugitives, woodcutters, from them we know that the Nilfgaard are prowling.
Our old friends, from the incursion, who came from the west, from the other side of the Ina.
But there are also reports of troops that came from the south.
From beyond the Yaruga.' 'And who are they fighting?' 'This is a puzzle.
The woodcutter spoke about an army, which is led by some White Queen.
She is fighting the Black ones.
Apparently she has taken her army to the other side of the Yaruga and carries fire and sword into imperial lands.' 'Whose army is moving?' 'I have no idea,' Zoltan scratched his ear.
'You know, every day hooves tread the path, but I do not ask them who they are.
We hide in the bushes...' Regis interrupted the conversation, after finishing treating the girl's burn.
'The dressing must be changed daily,' he said to the dwarf.
'I'll leave you with an ointment and something that does not stick to the burn.' 'Thank you, Surgeon.' 'The arm will heal,' the vampire said quietly, starring at the witcher.
'Over time the scar will disappear along with the young skin.
Worse is what is happening in the head of this unfortunate.
This is something my ointments cannot cure.' Geralt was silent.
The vampire wiped his hands with a rag.
'Fate or curse,' he said in a low voice.
'To be able to perceive the disease in the blood, the essence of the disease but not be able to cure...' 'True,' sighed Zoltan, 'dressing the skin is one thing, but if the brain is fucked up, you cannot do anything.
Just be caring and care for her... Thank you for your help, Surgeon.
I see that you have also joined the company of the witcher.' 'It just came out.' 'Hmmm,' Zoltan stroked his beard.
'So then, what are your plans to find Ciri?' 'We are headed to the east, to Caed Dhu, to the Druid Circle.
We hope the druids will help...' 'There is no help,' the girl sitting next to the piles of logs with a bandaged arm spoke in a loud and metallic voice.
'There is no help.
Only blood.
And a baptism of fire.
The fire purifies.
But also kills.' Regis firmly grabbed the stunned Zoltan by the arm, and with a gesture ordered him to silence.
Geralt, who knew about hypnotic trances, was silent and did not move.
'He who spills blood, and he who drank blood,' said the girl, without raising her head, 'will pay with blood.
Three days will pass and one will die in the second, and then something will die in each.
After a bit both will die, little by little... And when at last they collide with iron shoes and dry her tears, then what is left will die.
Die, even that which never dies.' 'Speak,' Regis said quietly and gently.
'Tell us what you see.' 'Mist.
A tower in the mist.
This is the Tower of Swallows... On a lake, which is covered in ice.' 'What else do you see?' 'Mist.' 'What do you feel?' 'Pain...' Regis did not have time to ask the next question.
The girl shook her head and screamed wildly.
When she raised her eyes there was indeed nothing in them but mist.
*** Zoltan, Geralt remembered, still running his fingers over the blade covered in runes, after this event acquired a new respect for Regis, he abandoned the familiar tone with which he used to address the surgeon.
Under the request of Regis, they did not say a word about the strange event to the rest.
The Witcher was not greatly affected by the event.
He had seen similar trances and sometimes it was said that the talk of the hypnotized was not prophetic, but a simple repetition of one's thoughts and subconscious suggestions of the hypnotist.
Admittedly, in this case it was not hypnosis, but the vampire's spell, and Geralt wondered what the girl would have drawn out of Regis's mind had the trance lasted longer.
*** For half a day they walked along with the dwarves and their protégés.
Zoltan Chivay then stopped walking and took the Witcher aside.
'We must separate,' he said.
'We have already made our decision, Geralt.
To the north is Mahakam, the valley leads directly to the mountains.
Enough adventure.
We are returning to our own.
Beneath Mount Carbon.' 'I understand.' 'I'm glad that you understand.
I wish you luck, you and your company.
A strange company, I dare to observe.' 'They want to help me,' the Witcher said quietly.
'It is something new for me.
So I have decided not to investigate their motives.' 'Wise,' Zoltan said as he removed from his back Sihil in its sheath, wrapped in goatskin.
'Here, take it.
Before our paths separate.' 'Zoltan...' 'Don't talk, just take it.
We will spend the war in the mountains seeing nothing but iron.
But it would be nice to at times, over a beer, to mention that a Mahakam forged Sihil is wielded in good hands and for a good cause.
There is no disgrace.
And when you find the ones who wronged your Ciri, give them one for Caleb Stratton.
And remember Zoltan Chivay and the dwarven forges.' 'You can be assured,' Geralt took the sword and buckled it across his back.
'You can be assured that I well remember.
In this lousy world, Zoltan, goodness, honesty and integrity are very memorable.' 'You're right,' the dwarf squinted his eyes.
'Therefore I will not forget you or the exiles from the clearing, or when Regis pulled the horseshoe from the fire.
When it comes to reciprocity in this regard...' He paused, coughed, cleared his throat and spat.
'Geralt, we robbed a merchant in Dillingen.
A wealthy man who had gained a fortune in the market.
When he loaded his wagon with gold and jewels and left the city, we struck against him.
He defended his assets like a lion and called for help, so we hit him on the head with a club a few times until he was calm and quiet.
Remember the chest we were carrying in the wagon that we buried alongside the river? Indeed that was the stolen wealth.
A thief's loot, on which we planned to build our futures.' 'Why are you telling me this Zoltan?' 'Because to you, I have the feeling, appearances are not deceiving if played for too long.
What you took to be good and noble proved to be vile and dishonest under a pretty normal mask.
It is easy to deceive, witcher, because you do not ask for motives.
But I will not deceive you.
And do not look to the women and children; do not take the dwarf that stands before you to be honest and noble.
Before you is a thief, a criminal and perhaps a murderer.
Because I do not rule out the merchant we left in a ditch by the side of the road in Dillingen.' They were silent for a long time, looking to the distant mountains covered in clouds to the north.
'Goodbye, Zoltan, 'Geralt said finally.
'It may be that the forces of whose existence I am slowly ceasing to doubt will still allow us to meet again.
I wish it is so.
I would like to introduce you to Ciri, and she would wish to meet you.
But even if I do not succeed, know that I will not forget you.
Farewell, dwarf.' 'Can I give you a hand? A thief and a bandit?' 'Without hesitation.
Because I am no longer as easily fooled as I used to be.
While I don't question motives, I am slowly learning the art of looking beneath the masks.' *** Geralt waved Sihil across the path of a passing moth.
After parting with Zoltan and his group, the Witcher recalled, we found a group of peasants wandering in the woods.
Some fled at the sight of us, but Milva stopped a few, threatening them with her bow.
The peasants, as it turned out, were, until recently, Nilfgaardian prisoners.
They were being used to cut down cedars for the emperor, until a few days ago, when a detachment attached the guards and released them.
Now they were returning to their homes.
Dandelion tried to determine who were these liberators and began a tenacious investigating, *** 'The soldiers were in the White Queen's service and fought against the Black ones! They said they are fighting behind the enemy like gorillas.' 'Like what?' 'Well, like I said.
Like gorillas.' 'Gorillas, damn it,' Dandelion frowned and waved his hand.
'Oh, people, people... I'm asking, what emblems were they were carrying?' A peasant took a stick and scratched the shape of a rhombus into the dirt.
'A diamond,' said Dandelion versed in heraldry.
'Not the Temerian lily, but the diamond.
The emblem of Rivia.
Interesting.
For Rivia is a good two hundred miles away.
Not to mention the fact that the armies of Rivia and Lyria were destroyed during the battles of Aldersberg and Dol Angra, and their country is now occupied by Nilfgaard... I do not understand!' 'That's normal,' the Witcher cut him off.
'Enough talk.
It is time to go.' *** 'Ha!' cried the Poet, who had been thinking about the information the he extracted from the peasants the whole time.
'I messed up! Not gorillas but guerrillas! Guerrillas! Behind enemy lines, you see?' 'We realize,' Cahir nodded.
'In short, in this area is Nordling guerrilla units.
Some of the branches probably formed from the remnant of the armies of Lyria and Rivia, broken in mid-July at Aldersberg.
I heard of the battle when I was captured by the Squirrels.' 'This is good news,' Dandelion said, proud that he had managed to decipher the riddle of the gorillas.
'Even if the peasants got the emblems wrong, we are not dealing with the army of Temeria.
And I do not think the news has reached the Queen of Rivia about two spies that not long ago enigmatically escaped the gallows of Marshal Vissegerd.
If we stumble upon these guerrillas, we will have a chance to talk to them.' 'We can count on that,' Geralt said.
'But to be honest, I would prefer to avoid them altogether.' 'But these people are your countrymen, Witcher,' Regis said.
'After all they call you, Geralt of Rivia.' 'A mistake,' he said in a cold voice.
'I call myself that.
The name gives my clients more confidence.' 'I understand,' the vampire smiled.
'But why did you choose Rivia?' 'I picked a stick, marked with different sounding names.
This method was suggested to me by my teacher.
He did not like the first few.
Then I insisted on taking the name Geralt Roger Eric du Haute-Bellegarde.
Vesemir considered this to be ridiculous, pretentious and stupid.
It seems that he was right.' Dandelion snorted loudly, and meaningfully, looking at both the vampire and the Nilfgaardian.
'The many parts of my name,' Regis said, looking slightly offended, 'are my real name.
And they are consistent with vampire tradition.' 'Mine also,' Cahir hastened to explain.
'Mawr is the name of my mother and my grandfather's name was Dyffryn.
There is nothing ridiculous about it poet.
And you yourself, out of curiosity, what is your name? Because Dandelion is an obvious pseudonym.' 'I cannot reveal my true name,' said the bard mysteriously, looking proudly down his nose.
'It is too well known and famous.' 'And mine,' Milva suddenly joined in the conversation, after being grim and silent, 'made me sick in the guts when I was named so I shortened it to: Maria, Mariquilla or Marieta.
Well when on hears my name, they think they are free to slap my ass...' *** It was growing dark.
The cranes had flown away, their trumpeting cries faded into the distance.
The breeze blowing from the hills was silent.
The witcher put Sihil back into its sheath.
It was this morning.
This morning.
And at noon the problems began.
We could have known before, he thought.
But who of us except Regis, knows these things? Yes, we all knew that Milva vomited at dawn.
But sometimes we ate things that had all of our guts churning.
Dandelion also vomited once or twice, and once Cahir got diarrhoea, and was terrified that he had caught dysentery.
The fact that the girl now and again jumped from her saddle and ran off to the bushes, I took for a bladder infection... How could I have been so stupid? Regis, it seems, guessed the truth.
But he remained silent.
He stayed silent until he could no longer remain silent.
When we stopped to camp in an abandoned shack, Milva took him into the forest, talking with him for a long time and often loudly.
The vampire came out of the forest alone.
Boiled some water and mixed some herbs, then suddenly called us all to the hut.
He began bluntly, with his professor's voice.
*** 'I appeal to all,' said Regis.
'We are a team, and so we assume mutual responsibility.
Nothing changes the fact that among us there is one who bears the highest responsibility.
Directly, so to speak.' 'Express yourself more clearly, damn it!' snapped Dandelion.
'Team, responsibility...What is wrong with Milva? What is this disease?' 'This is not a disease,' Cahir said quietly.
'At least not in the strict sense of the word,' confirmed Regis.
'The girl is pregnant.' Cahir nodded as a sign that he had guessed.
Dandelion was dumbfounded.
Geralt bit his lip.
'In which month?' 'She refused, fairly impolitely, to give me a date, including the date of her last menstrual cycle.
But I know this.
This will be the tenth week.' 'So forget your pathetic appeal to direct the responsibility,' Geralt said grimly, 'at any of us.
If you had any doubts in this respect, this dispels them.
But you had a right to speak of collective responsibility.
She is now with us.
Suddenly we all have to assume the role of husbands and fathers.
We listen in suspense to what the doctor has to say.' 'A good, regular diet,' Regis began enumerating.
'No stress.
Healthy sleep.
And soon she will need to stop riding a horse.' Everyone was silent for a long time.
'We understand,' Dandelion said finally.
'We have a problem, gentlemen, husbands and fathers.' 'More than you think,' said the vampire.
'Or less.
Everything depends on your point of view.' 'I don't understand.' 'Well, you should,' murmured Cahir.
'She demanded,' Regis said, 'that I prepare her a strong and effective... medication.
She considers this to be the remedy to her problem.
She is determined.' 'Did you give it to her?' Regis smiled.
'Without the agreement of the other fathers?' 'The medicine that she is asking for,' Cahir said quietly, 'is not a miracle cure.
I have three sisters; I know what I'm talking about.
She seems to think that she will drink the decoction and the next day will continue to ride with us on our journey.
This is not so.
It will be at least ten days before she can even dream about sitting on a horse.
Before you give her the medicine, Regis, you have to tell her.
And you can only give her the medicine when we can find her a bed.
A clean bed.' 'I understand,' Regis nodded.
'One vote in favour.
And you, Geralt?' 'What about me?' 'My lords,' the vampire fixed them with his dark eyes.
'Do not pretend you do not understand.' 'In Nilfgaard,' Cahir said, blushing and lowering his head, 'such matters are determined solely by the woman.
Nobody has the right to influence her decision.
Regis said that Milva is determined to take the... medicine.
Therefore I think of this fact as accomplished.
And the consequences of this fact.
But I am a foreigner and not familiar with... I should not have spoken at all.
Forgive me.' 'For what?' the troubadour said with surprise.
'Do you think of us as savages, Nilfgaardian? As primitive tribes, adhering to shamanic taboo? It is obvious that only a woman could make such a decision, it is their inherent right! If Milva decides to...' 'Shut up, Dandelion,' the Witcher growled.
'Be so kind as to shut up.' 'Do you believe otherwise?' the poet raised his voice.
'Would you forbid...' 'Shut up, damn it, because I will not vouch for myself! Regis, I get the feeling you are conducting a poll between us, why? You're the doctor.
The measure which she asks for...
Yes, measure because I don't think the term medicine is suitable here...
Only you can prepare the measure and give it to her.
And you will do so when asked again.
Do not refuse.' 'The measure has already been prepared,' Regis held up a small bottle of dark glass.
'If she asks again, I will not refuse.
If she asks again.' 'So what is this? About our unanimity? The universal consent? What are you waiting for?' 'You know what this is about,' said the vampire.
'You feel exactly as I do.
But since you asked, I will answer.
Yes, Geralt, that is what I need, and it is not me waiting for something.' 'Can you speak more clearly?' 'No, Dandelion,' said the vampire.
'I cannot be clearer.
Especially since there is no need too.
Right, Geralt?' 'It is true,' the Witcher dropped his forehead into his hands.
'Yes, damn it, it's true.
But why are you looking to me? I've got to do this? I can't do it.
I can't.
I am not suitable for this role...
Not at all, do you understand?' 'No,' Dandelion interjected.
'I do not understand at all.
Cahir? Do you understand?' 'Yes' he said slowly.
'I think so.' 'Aha,' the troubadour nodded.
'Aha.
Geralt understands, Cahir think he understands.
And when I ask for an explanation you first order me to shut up, and then I get told there is no need to understand.
Thank you.
I've spent twenty years in the service of poetry, long enough to know that there are things that one understands immediately, even without words, or they will never understand.' The vampire smiled.
'I do not know anyone,' he said, 'who could have put it more beautifully.' *** It was completely dark.
The witcher stood up.
You only die once, he thought.
There is no escape.
There is no more waiting.
I have to do this and that's it.
*** Milva was sitting alone by a small fire that was kindled in the woods, in a hole left by an uprooted tree, out of the wind and away from the hut in which the rest of the company was spending the night.
She did not move when she heard his footsteps.
As if she was expecting him.
She shifted to one side making room for him beside her on the tree trunk.
'So what?' she said dryly, without waiting for him to say anything.
'Quite the mess, eh?' He did not answer.
'It's not what you imagined when we set off, eh? When you accepted me into the company? Did you think that you would end up with such a stupid wench? I've heard you men talk about me saying that I'm a maiden but I may be useful.
She is a healthy, strong, young woman who can pull a bow and sit in a saddle.
And it appeared that I was no benefit, but a hindrance.
Just a stupid girl with a swollen belly!' 'Why did you come with me?' he asked quietly.
'Why did you not stay in Brokilon? If you knew...' 'I knew,' she interrupted quickly.
'After all, I was among the Dryads, and in a moment they know if a girl is pregnant.
They knew sooner than myself... But I did not expect my weakness to catch up with me so soon.
I thought there would be an opportunity to drink a decoction or find some herb, and nobody would notice...' 'It's not that simple.' 'I know, the vampire told me.
I have waited too long.
Now it will not go smoothly...' 'That's not what I meant.' 'The plague!' she said finally.
'And to think I had Dandelion in reserve! I noticed that he was keeping up, but he was still weak and not accustomed to trouble, so I watched, and I expected that he would not be able to continue on the way and have to turn back.
I thought that if it was really bad, I'd go back with him... And here we are – Dandelion is fine and I...' He voice broke suddenly.
Geralt hugged her.
And immediately knew that this was the gesture that she had been waiting for, that she so badly needed.
The roughness and hardness of the archer from Brokilon had disappeared, instantly she was a trembling, delicate, softness of a frightened little girl.
But it was she who broke the long silence.
'You said... There in Brokilon.
That I would need a shoulder... To lean on.
That night I cried in the darkness... But you are here, I feel your shoulder.
And yet I want to cry... Oh... Why do you tremble?' 'Nothing.
A memory.' 'What will become of me?' He did not answer.
The question was not directed at him.
'Father showed me once... In my country, there is a river inhabited by black wasps, that lay their eggs in living caterpillars.
When the larvae hatch, they eat the insides... Now inside me there is a similar thing.
In me, inside my stomach.
Growing, growing and over time it will eat me alive...' 'Milva...' 'Maria.
I'm Maria, not Milva.
How can I kite? I'm a hen with an egg, I do not kite... Milva of the Dryads, who courageously goes onto the battlefield and pulls arrows from the bloody corpses, not feeling sorry for any of them, but feeling sorry for the good arrowheads! And if any of them were found to still be breathing, she would take a knife to their throat.
For fate betrayed those humans and Milva laughed... Their blood cries out now.
That blood, like a wasp's venom, now eats Milva from the inside.
Maria pays for Milva.' He was silent.
Mainly because he did not know what to say.
The girl rested on his shoulder.
'I was leading to Brokilon a commando squad,' she said quietly.
'It was June, the Sunday before the solstice.
We were hunted, there was fighting, seven of us escaped – Five half elves, an Elf and me.
We rode up the Ribbon for half a mile, but there were riders behind us, riders in front of us and all around were marshes and swamps... At night, we hid in the brushwood.
The horses needed rest and so did we.
Then the elf took off his clothes without a word and lay down.
I froze; I didn't know what to do... Leave, and pretend I didn't see? The blood was pounding in my temples, and he suddenly said – "Who knows what tomorrow will bring? Who of us will cross the Ribbon and who of us will be cover by the earth? En'ca Minne." Which means A little love.
None, he said, can overcome death.
Or fear.
They were afraid, he was afraid, I was afraid... So I also stripped and lay down next to him on a blanket.
When we first embraced, I gnashed my teeth, after all I was not ready, but frightened and dry... But he was wise and sensitive, even though he looked like an inexperienced youngster, he was still an elf... Wise... Sensitive... he smelled of moss, grass and roses... After a second I poured into his arms... happy... A little love? The devil knows to this day, what was love, and what was fear, but I'm sure the fear was greater... Because love was fake, though good, but fake, because it was like a show in a small theatre, if the actors have talent, you forget that they are pretending and think it's true.
But the fear was.
Truly was.' He remained silent.
'But we cannot overcome death.
At dawn, two of them were killed crossing the Ribbon.
Of the three that survived, I have not seen more than once.
My mother used to say that every girl always knows whose fruit she carries in her womb... But I do not know.
Not even the names of those elves I found, so how do you know? Tell me, how?' He was silent.
He allowed his shoulder to speak for him.
'And besides, all I want to know is if the vampire has prepared the remedy... You will have to leave me in a village... No, do not talk, be silent.
I know how you are.
You are not even able to get rid of this vicious mare to get another horse.
You do not leave any one behind.
But now you are going to.
After the remedy, I will not be able to climb into the saddle.
But I will heal, and I will follow you.
Because I want you to find Ciri, witcher.
With my help you can find and recover her.' 'That is why you came with me,' he said raising his head.
'For this reason.' She bowered her head.
'That's why you came with me,' he repeated.
'You wanted to help save someone else's child.
You wanted to pay.
To pay off a debt and you were determined to do it at the time, when we left... Someone else's child for you own.
And I promised to help when you needed it.
Milva, I cannot help you.
Believe me, I cannot.' This time she was silent.
He no longer felt that he could be silent.
'Then, in Brokilon, I contracted a debt with you and I promised you I would pay.
It was not reasonable.
I was a fool.
You offered me help when I needed urgent help.
There is no way to pay that debt.
You cannot put a price on something priceless.
Some say that absolutely everything in the world has its price.
It is not true.
Some things are priceless, and you cannot pay.
There is an easy way to recognize those things, because once lost, they are lost forever.
I have lost many of those things.
So today I cannot help you.' 'You just did,' she said calmly.
'You do not know how much.
Now go, please.
Leave me alone.
Go away, witcher.
Go away, before you shatter my world completely.' *** When they left at dawn, Milva was at the head of the company, calm and smiling.
And riding behind her was Dandelion who began to strum his lute, while whistling a tune.
Regis and Geralt were bringing up the rear – at one point the vampire looked over at the witcher, smiled and nodded with approval and admiration.
Without a word.
He then pulled from his doctor's bag a small dark glass bottle and showed it to Geralt.
He smiled again and threw it into the bushes.
The Witcher was silent.
*** When they stopped to water the horses, Geralt pulled Regis aside into a secluded spot.
'Change of plans,' he announced dryly.
'We are not going through Ysgith.' The vampire paused for a moment, staring at him with black eyes.
'If I didn't know,' he said at last, 'that as a witcher you only fear real danger, I would think that this is the unreasonable babble of the insane.' 'But you do know.
So think more logically.' 'Certainly.
However, I would draw your attention to two things.
First, the condition in which Milva finds herself is not a disease or disability.
She must of course take care of herself, but she is completely healthy and functional.
I would say even more capable.
The hormones...' 'Drop the mentoring tone,' Geralt interrupted.
'Because it is starting to get on my nerves.' 'That was the first thing,' reminded Regis, 'the second is that if Milva realises you are being overprotective, treating her like a plaything and sheltering her like an egg, she is simply going to get mad.
And then she will get stressed, which is absolutely inappropriate for her.
Geralt, I do not want to be a mentor.
I want to be rational.' He did not answer.
'And there is a third issue,' Regis said, his eyes still drilling into Geralt.
'I do not push for Ysgith for a lust for adventure, but as a necessity.
For the armies roam the hills and we must get to the Druids in Caed Dhu.
It seems to me that this is urgent.
That we want to get the information as quick as possible and be off to rescue Ciri.' 'Yes,' Geralt looked away.
'It is important.
I want to save and recover Ciri.
Until recently I thought at any price.
But not now.
Not at this price.
I will not pay this price; I do not agree to take this risk.
We are not going through Ysgith.' 'And the alternative?' 'The opposite shore of the Yaruga.
We will go up the river, far beyond the marshes.
We'll then cross back across the river and travel on to Caed Dhu.
If it is too difficult, then just the two of just will visit the Druids.
I'll swim and you can cross in bat form.
Why are you staring at me? After all, the river is not obstacle for a vampire; it is another myth and superstition.
Or maybe I'm wrong?' 'No, no you're not wrong.
But I can only fly when the moon is full.' 'It is only two weeks away.
By the time we reach the right place, it will be almost full.' 'Geralt,' the vampire said, still not taking his eyes from the witcher.
'You are a strange man.
For clarification, it was not a derogatory term.
Very well, we renounce Ysgith as to dangerous for a woman in a difficult state.
Crossing to the other shore of the Yaruga, in your opinion, is safer.' 'I can assess the level of risk.' 'I do not doubt it.' 'Not a word to Milva and the others.
If they ask, this is part of our plan.' 'Of course.
Let us start searching for a boat.' They did not have to search for a long time, and the result of the search exceeded expectations.
They did not find a boat, but a ferry.
Hidden among the willows, cleverly camouflaged with branches and bunches of rushes, it was betrayed by the rope connecting it to the left bank.
They also found the ferryman.
When he heard them coming, he hid in a thicket, but Milva easily tracked down his hiding place and pulled him out by his collar.
She also found in the thicket a powerfully built young man with face like an idiot.
The ferryman was shivering with fear and his eyes where circling like mice in an empty granary.
'To the other side?' he groaned when he heard what was required of him.
'Not for anything! That is Nilfgaardian territory and this is wartime! They will catch us and plant us on a pole! I will not cross! Kill me if you like, but I will not cross!' 'I can kill you,' Milva said with clenched teeth.
'But before I do I may break all your bones as well.
Open your mouth again and you'll see how I can.' 'War time,' the vampire's eyes drilled into the ferryman, 'certainly does not prevent smuggling, my good man? This is your ferry, yet it is cunningly placed far from the royal and Nilfgaardian frontiers, if I'm not mistaken? So get under way and push it into the water.' 'This would be wise,' Cahir said, stroking the hilt of his sword.
'If you do not go with us, then we will cross without you and your raft will remain on the opposite shore.
You'll have to swim for it.
So take us across then come back.
An hour of fear, then forget about it.' 'But you will wear a big purse,' hissed Milva 'so you won't forget us until winter.' In view of these arguments, the ferryman relented and soon the whole company was on the ferry.
Some of the horses, especially Roach, were stubborn and refused to embark, but the ferryman and his assistant managed to get them aboard.
The skill with which they did this, argued that this was not the first time they had smuggled stolen horses across the Yaruga.
The fool assistant grabbed the rope and started the crossing.
When they were out on the open water and the wind enveloped them, they became more animated.
The crossing of the Yaruga was something new, the next step, indicating progress in the journey.
Before them was the Nilfgaardian shore, the line, the border.
Everyone felt the excitement.
Even the ferryman and the assistant, who suddenly began to whistle a tune.
Geralt also felt a strange exhilaration, as if at any moment from the alders on the left bank Ciri would emerge and he would shout with joy at the sight.
Instead the ferryman shouted.
And it was not in joy.
'Gods! We're doomed!' Geralt looked in the indicated direction and cursed.
Among the alders high on the left bank, armour flashed and hooves thundered.
Within seconds the pier on the left bank was covered with horsemen.
'Black ones!' cried the ferryman, pale and releasing the wheel.
'The Nilfgaardians! Death! Gods, save us!' 'Hold the horses, Dandelion!' Milva ordered, removing her bow from its case.
'Hold the horses!' 'It is not the imperials,' Cahir said.
'I do not think...' His voice was drowned by the cries of the nearest horse and the screaming ferryman.
Spurred on by the shouts, the assistant grabbed an axe, swung and cut at the rope.
The ferryman helped him with a second axe.
The riders on the pier saw it to and began to shout.
Several dove into the water and grabbed the rope.
Some threw themselves into the water and swam towards the boat.
'Leave the rope!' Dandelion cried.
'They are not Nilfgaardians! Do not cut...' But it was too late.
The rope was cut and sank under its weight; the ferry turned slightly and began to sail down the river.
The horsemen on the shore raised a terrible roar.
'Dandelion is right,' Cahir said grimly.
'Those are not the imperials... This is the Nilfgaardian shore, but that is not Nilfgaard.' 'Of course not!' exclaimed Dandelion.
'I recognise the emblems! Eagles and diamonds! That is the emblem of Lyria! It is Lyria and Rivia! Hey, people...' 'Take cover behind the rail, you idiot!' The Poet, as usual, rather than obeying a warning, he went to investigate what it was for.
And then in the air, arrows whistled.
Some of them stuck into the side of the ferry, some flew higher and splashed into the water.
Two flew straight at Dandelion, but the Witcher already with his sword in hand, jumped and with two quick blows, deflected the arrows.
'By the Great Sun,' Cahir gasped.
'He deflected them... Two arrows! Incredible! I have never seen anything like it...' 'And you'll not see it again! This was the first time in my life I was able to deflect two! Hide behind the side!' The soldiers stopped firing, seeing the current started to push the ferry directly to their bank.
The water foamed from where it was filled with horses.
The pier was filled with further horses.
There were at least two hundred armed men on the banks.
'Help!' cried the ferryman.
'Grab those spars, my lords! Push us away from the banks!' The obeyed immediately, grabbing the spare spars on board.
Dandelion and Regis stayed with the horses.
Milva, Cahir and the witcher supported the efforts of the ferryman and his assistant.
With the five spars they were slowly able to turn the ferry about and send it gliding towards the center of the river.
The soldiers on the bank again raised a roar, and laid their hands on their bows, arrows began to whistle through the air and one of the horses whinnied wildly.
Luckily the ferry, driven by a strong current, began moving away from the shore, faster and faster, beyond the reach of effective shots.
Soon they were sailing down the middle of the river.
The ferry was spinning like shit in a sink.
The horses continued to stamp and neigh, shaking the vampire and Dandelion, who were holding the reins.
The riders on the shore shook their fists at them in a threatening manner.
Geralt could distinguish among them a knight on a white horse, waving a sword and giving orders.
After a moment the cavalcade rode back into the woods and galloped along the high edge of the bank.
Their armour gleamed among the thickets.
'They will not let us go, the bastards,' the ferryman moaned.
'They know that the current will curve around and carry us against their shore...
Have the spars ready, lady and gentlemen! If we turn towards the shore on the right, we must help overcome the current and make a landing...
Otherwise we are fucked...
' They sailed, spinning and sliding slightly towards the right bank, with its high, steep cliffs, bristling with pines.
The left bank, from which they were moving away from, had a flat semi-circular headland protruding into the river.
The horsemen galloped onto the headland, their momentum helping them enter the water.
Around the headland, clearly there were shoals, some sandy, and before the water reached the horses' belly, they had gone quite far into the river.
'They have us in range,' Milva said in sombre tone.
'Take cover.' Arrows whistled again, some hit against the boards of the ferry.
However, the current steer the front of the craft in the direction of the right bank.
'To the spars now!' The ferryman cried, trembling.
'We must land before the current snatches us!' 'It was not easy.
The current was strong, the water was deep and the ferry was unwieldy.
At first it did not react to all of their efforts, but finally they planted the spars firmly into the ground.
It seemed like they would succeed, when suddenly Milva let go of her spar and without a word pointed at the right bank.
'This time...' Cahir said, wiping the sweat from his brow.
'This time, it is Nilfgaard.' Geralt also saw it.
The riders, who had appeared on the right bank, wore black and green cloaks, the horses wore distinctive harnesses.
There were at least a hundred.
'We go from the frying pan into the fire...' groaned the ferryman.
'By the Gods! It is the Black ones!' 'The spars!' roared the Witcher.
'Use the spars and the current! Get further from the shore.' Again, this proved to be a difficult task.
The current by the right bank was strong and pushing the ferry straight towards a high embankment, they could already hear the cries of the Nilfgaardians.
When after a few moments of straining with the spar, Geralt looked up and saw pine boughs over his head.
An arrow shot from the top of the cliffs, struck on the deck of the barge only two feet away from him.
Another was heading straight for Cahir, which the witcher deflected with a slash of his sword.
Milva, Cahir, the ferryman and his assistant, no longer pushed from the bottom, but from the shore and the slope.
Geralt threw down his sword and sized a spar to help them, and the ferry began to drift back towards the center of the river.
But it was still dangerously close to the right banks and on the bank the Nilfgaardians started a galloping chase.
Before they had time to get away they sailed around the ends of the cliffs.
In the small reeds on the shore appeared the Nilfgaardians.
The air began to howl with the sounds of feathered arrows.
'Take cover!' The ferryman's assistant suddenly coughed in an odd way and dropped his spar into the water.
Geralt saw the arrowhead and four inches of the shaft protruding from his back.
Cahir's chestnut reared on two legs and whinnied with pain, snorted and shook its neck that was pierced by an arrow, it knocked down Dandelion and jumped overboard.
The other horses also whinnied and reared; the barge was shaking and pounding with hooves.
'Hold the horses!' shouted the vampire.
'Hold...' He stopped suddenly, fell back onto the railing and sat down heavily.
A black feathered arrow was protruding from his chest.
Milva also saw this.
She screamed with rage, seized the bow at her feet and pulled arrows from her quiver.
She began to shoot.
Faster.
Arrow after arrow.
Not one missed its target.
On the shore was pandemonium, the Nilfgaardians retreated into the forest, among the reeds, leaving the dead and the screaming wounded.
Hidden in the woods, they continued to fire, but the arrows could not reached them, because the ferry was dragged by the current to the center of the river.
The distance was too great for the Nilfgaardians with their short bows.
But not for Milva's bow.
Among the Nilfgaardians there suddenly appeared an officer in a black cloak, wearing a helmet, from which swayed the wings of a crow.
He shouted, waving his club, pointing down the river.
Milva her legs wide, brought the string to her cheek, and measured the distance.
An arrow sounded in the air, the officer bent back in the saddle, sagging into the arms of his soldiers.
Milva again stretched the bow string and realised it from her fingers.
One of the Nilfgaardian supporting officers screamed piercingly and flew from his horse.
The others disappeared into the woods.
'Masterful shots,' Regis said quietly from behind the witcher.
'But we better work the spars.
We're still too close to shore, and we are going into the shallows.' Geralt and the archer turned around.
'You're alive?' they cried in unison.
'You don't think,' the vampire showed them the black feathered arrow, 'that I can be harmed by a single stick of wood?' There was no time to wonder.
The ferry again turned around and flowed towards the center of the river.
But from around a bend in the river, appeared another beach, sandy and with shallow shoals and on the shore were the Nilfgaardian troops.
Some rode into the river and prepared their bows.
Everyone, including Dandelion, rushed to the spars.
Soon they were unable to reach the bottom; the current was dragging the ferry.
'Well,' said Milva, panting and releasing the spar.
'Now they will not catch us...' 'One has ridden out to the end of a sand bank,' Dandelion pointed.
'He is getting ready to shoot! Take cover now!' 'It will not hit,' Milva estimated with the look of an experienced archer.
The arrow splashed into the water two fathoms from the bow of the ferry.
'He is aiming again!' cried the minstrel, leaving the side of the ferry.
'Beware!' 'It will not hit,' Milva repeated while she adjusting the guard on her left forearm.
'The bow is not bad, but the archer is no good.
A scatterbrain.
After each shot he is shivering and slipping like he is flowing a snails trail.
Grab the horses.
Do not let go of them.' This time the Nilfgaardian's arrow flew over their heads and the ferry.
Milva raised her bow, stood with legs apart, quickly pulled the string to her cheek and lowered it gently, without changing position a fraction of an inch.
The Nilfgaardian fell into the water as if struck by lightning, and began to bob in the tide.
His black cloak began to puff out like a balloon.
'There, it is done,' Milva put down her bow.
'But it is already too late for him to learn.' 'The other troops behind us,' Cahir pointed to the right bank.
'I assure you that they will not cease in their pursuit.
Not after Milva shot their officer.
The river meanders, at the next turn the current will bring us to the shore again.
They know this and will wait...' 'We have nothing but bad trouble,' said the ferryman rising from his slain assistant.
'The current will drive us back to the right shore.
Where we will be between two fires...
Because of you, lady and gentlemen! This blood will fall on your heads...' 'Shut up and grab the spars!' On the left bank, closer now, near the edge of the river stood a line of riders Dandelion had identified as the Lyrian guerrillas.
They shouted and waved their hands.
Geralt saw among them a rider on a white horse.
He was not sure, but it seemed to him that the rider was a woman.
A blond woman in armour, but without a helmet.
'What are they shouting?' Dandelion had his ears pricked.
'Something about the queen, or so?' The shouting on the left bank intensified.
They clearly heard the clanking of iron.
'The battle,' Cahir evaluated in two words.
'Look.
The imperials in the forest.
The Northerners are fleeing from them.
And now they are trapped.' 'The solution to this trap,' Geralt spat into the water, 'was this ferry.
They wanted it, I think, to save the queen and the elders by transporting them by ferry to the other side.
And we seized the ferry.
Oh, they do not like us, now they do not like...' 'Well they should,' Dandelion said.
'The ferry would have done them no good, but carried them straight into the hands of the Nilfgaardians on the right bank.
We should also avoid the right bank.
The Lyrians can be negotiated with, but the Black ones would kill us without mercy...' 'It carries us faster and faster,' Milva assessed, spitting into the water and watched the rejected sputum.
'And we are sailing in the middle of the river.
We may be able to out run both.
The turns are smooth, the banks are low and covered with only reeds.
We could sail down the Yaruga and they could not catch up with is.
Soon they would get bored.' 'Like hell,' moaned the ferryman, 'in front of us is Red Binduga! There is a sand bank and a bridge goes over it! The ferry will get stuck...
If we continue to go this way, they'll be waiting...' 'The Nordlings will not overtake us,' Regis pointed to the left bank.
'They have their own worries.' Indeed, on the left bank a bloody fight was unfolding.
The heart of it was hidden in the woods and was hinted at by the cries of war, but in many places fighting took place on the shore and the bodies of Black ones and Nordlings fell with a splash into the Yaruga River.
The clash and screech of steel died away, as the ferry quickly floated down the river.
They sailed down the middle of the river.
On both sides it was quiet.
Geralt was beginning to hope that everything would end well when he saw before them a wooden bridge that connected the two banks.
The river flowed under the bridge, between sand banks and islets.
One of the pillars of the bridge was supported on one of the islands.
On the right bank was Binduga - where they saw piles of trunks and wood.
'There is a little shallow,' whispered the ferryman.
'Just in the middle that can be passed on the right hand side of the island.
The current will take us past there, but hold on to your spars, we may become stuck...' 'On the bridge,' Cahir said, shading his eyes with his hands, 'is an army.
On the bridge and on the shore...' They all could see it.
And everyone saw that suddenly from behind the army, emerging from the woods, was a squad of men on horseback in green and black layers.
They were close enough to hear the sounds of battle.
'Nilfgaard,' Cahir said dryly.
'Those who chased us.
Which means those are the Nordlings on the bridge...' 'The spars!' cried the ferryman.
'While they are fighting, we can slip by!' They did not slip by.
They were already very close to the bridge when it suddenly started banging with the sound of running soldiers boots.
The running soldiers wore white adorned with a red diamond.
Most had crossbows, which they rested on the railing and pointed at the ferry approaching the bridge.
'Do not shoot, by the gods!' Dandelion shouted with all the force of his lungs.
'Do not shoot, we are your people!' The soldiers did not hear.
Or did not want to listen.
The salvo of crossbow bolts was devastating.
Among the people the only one hit was the ferryman, still trying to steer with his spar.
The bolt went through him from side to side.
Cahir, Milva and Regis hid behind the rail just in time.
Geralt reached for his sword and deflected a bolt, but there were still many more bolts.
Dandelion, still shaking his hands and yelling, was not hit by some inexplicable miracle.
However, the actual slaughter the hail of bolts cause was among the horses.
The grey was pierced by three bolts and fell to its knees.
It fell kicking its legs and struck Milva, and Regis's bay stallion.
Roach shot in the withers reared up and jumped overboard.
'Don't shoot!' Dandelion shouted.
'We are your people!' This time he succeeded.
The ferry, carried by the current, crashed to a halt against the bank.
Everyone jumped onto the island or into the water, escaping the hooves of the horses kicking in agony.
Milva was the last, for her movement suddenly became frighteningly slow.
She was hit with a bolt, thought the witcher seeing the girl drag herself overboard with effort, and then fall limp onto the sand.
He jumped towards her, but the vampire was faster.
'Something has torn in me,' she said very slowly.
Her hands were pressed to her lower abdomen.
Geralt saw the legs of her wool trousers darken with blood.
'Pour this onto my hands,' Regis handed him a bottle drawn from his bag.
'Pour it onto my hands, quickly.' 'What is happening?' 'Abortion.
Give me a knife; I have to cut off the clothing.
And go away.' 'No,' said Milva.
'I want him to stay with me...' A tear run down her cheek.
Above them the bridge resonated with the boots of soldiers.
'Geralt!' Dandelion cried.
The Witcher, seeing what the vampire was doing to Milva, turned his head in embarrassment.
He saw soldiers in white jackets rushing along the bridge.
On the right bank, from Binduga, yelling could still be heard.
'They are fleeing,' Dandelion gasped, running over and tugging at his sleeve.
'The Nilfgaardians are almost at the bridge! They are still fighting hard, but most of the soldiers have gone over to the left bank! Do you hear? We also need to run!' 'We can't' he said gritting his teeth.
'Milva miscarried.
She will not be able to walk.' Dandelion swore disgustingly.
'We will need to carry her,' he said.
'It is our only chance...' 'Not our only,' Cahir said.
'Geralt, to the bridge.' 'Why?' 'Let's halt the flight.
If the Nordlings can hold the right side of the bridge, we can get Milva to the left bank.' 'How do we stop them fleeing?' 'I have led soldiers before.
Climb the pillar onto the bridge!' Once on the bridge Cahir showed that he indeed had experience in controlling panic among the troops.
'Where are you going, you sons of bitches! Where, you motherfuckers!' he roared, emphasizing each word with a blow of his fists, on the boards of the bridge.
'Halt! Stand your ground, you fucking scoundrels!' Some of those fleeing – far from all – stopped at the terrifying roars and the sight of Cahir waving his bright sword.
Others tried to sneak behind his back.
But Geralt also drew his sword and joined the show.
'Where are you going?' he cried, clutching a soldier and throwing him back in place.
'Where are you going? Stop! Turn around!' 'The Nilfgaardians, sir!' cried the Landsknecht.
'It's a bloodbath! Let us pass!' 'Cowards!' Dandelion cried, climbing onto the bridge and emitting a voice Geralt had not heard before.
'Unworthy cowards! Rabbit hearts! You flee to save your skin? To live with indignity and baseness?' 'There are too many, sir knight! We cannot face them!' 'The Centurion is dead...' moaned another.
'The Decurion had vanished! Death is coming!' 'Raise your heads! Your comrades,' Cahir shouted, shaking his sword, 'still fight at the shore and on the bridge! They are still fighting! Shame on him who does not go to their aid! Follow me!' 'Dandelion,' the Witcher hissed.
'Go back to the island.
You have to help Regis get Milva to the left bank.
Why are you still standing here?' 'Follow me, lads!' Cahir yelled, brandishing his sword.
'Follow me, those who believe in the gods! For Binduga! Kill, kill!' Several soldiers shook their arms at took up the cry, their voices expressing very different degree of resolve.
Several of those who had already fled, shamed, turned back to the bridge and joined the rest of the army.
The army suddenly led by the Witcher, stood against Nilfgaard.
Perhaps the real army would have marched to the shore, but typically, at the entrance to the bridge appeared dark men on horseback.
The Nilfgaardians had pierced the defences and had come to the bridge, the boards rattled under the horseshoes.
Some of the soldiers turned and ran again, others stood still and indecisive.
Cahir cursed.
In Nilfgaardian.
But no one realised except the witcher.
'What you started, you need to finish,' Geralt growled, clutching his sword in his hand.
'Let's go to them! You have to get the troops fired up for battle!' 'Geralt,' Cahir stopped, and looked at the Witcher uncertainly.
'You want me to kill...
My countrymen? I can't...' 'I shit on this war,' The Witcher clenched his teeth.
'This is for Milva.
You joined the company.
Make a decision.
You are with me or you are on the side with the Black ones.
Quickly.' 'I'm going with you.' And so it happened that the Witcher and the Nilfgaardian shouted wildly waved their swords and rushed forward without hesitation, the two comrades, two friends and companions, to meet a common enemy in an unequalled battle.
This was their baptism of fire.
A baptism of a common struggle, rage, madness and death.
They went to their death, they, the two companions.
Or so they thought.
They could not possible know that they would not die that day, on this particular bridge, slung over the Yaruga River.
They did not know that it was intended for them a different death.
In another place and at another time.
The sleeves of the Nilfgaardians had silver embroidery depicting a scorpion.
Cahir slashed two with swift strokes of his long sword.
Geralt also struck two with Sihil.
Then he jumped onto the railing of the bridge, running along it and attacking another.
He was a Witcher, maintaining his balance was for him a trifle, but the acrobatic feat amazed and surprised the Nilfgaardian attackers.
They died, amazed and surprised by the dwarvern blade which cut through their mail like wool.
Blood soon made the boards and planks of the bridge slippery.
Observing the advantage of their armed commanders over the numerically strong army on the bridge, the defenders raised a chorus, a bellowing, in which could be heard the returning of morale and fighting spirit.
And so it was that those who had recently been deserting in panic, rushed over the Nilfgaardians like ravenous wolves, cutting with swords, axes, stabbing with spears and bludgeoning with clubs and halberds.
The railings on both sides of the bridge cracked, the horses flew into the river along with their riders on their black cloaks.
The uproarious army pushed onto the opposite shore, howling and pushing Geralt and Cahir, the accidental commanders, not letting them do what they wanted to do.
Which was to withdraw stealthily, back to Milva and move her to the left bank.
The battle raged on.
The Nilfgaardians surrounded and cut off the soldiers on the bridge who had not escaped, yet defended themselves fiercely from behind barricades built of cedar and pine logs.
At the sight of the impending siege of the handful still defending themselves a joyful shout was raised.
A little too hastily and prematurely.
A compact wedge of reinforcements had pushed and driven the Nilfgaardians from the bridge, but now, at the entrance of the bridge, a counter attack fell on their flank.
If not for the barricades and the pine logs, inhibiting both the escape and the momentum of the cavalry, the infantry would have been scattered in the blink of an eye.
Covered by the wood piles and logs, the soldiers began a fierce fight.
For Geralt, this was something he did not know a lot about, a whole new battle.
There was no fencing or fancy footwork, it was just a chaotic and constant raining of blows, which were flying in from all sides.
Still, he benefited of the very well-deserved privilege of being a commander – the soldiers surrounded him, covering his flanks and protected his back for him, making a place in front where he could strike and sow death.
But the crowd was getting bigger.
The Witcher and his army, without knowing how, fought shoulder to shoulder with a handful of bloodied and fatigued defenders at the barricades, mostly dwarvern mercenaries.
They fought in a ring.
And then came the fire.
One of the sides of the barricade, located between Binduga and the bridge, was a big, spiny hedgehog pile of boughs and branches, an invincible obstacle for horses and infantry.
Now the pile had caught fire – someone had thrown in a torch.
The defenders retreated, driven by the heat and the smoke.
Whirling, blinded, hindering each other, the began to die under the blows of the Nilfgaardian attackers.
The situation was saved by Cahir.
Having experience with war, he led his troops around the barricade.
They had separated from Geralt's group, but now returned.
He had won a horse with black trapping and swung his sword around him, striking the flank.
Behind him, yelling fanatically came, halberdiers and spearmen in doublets with red diamonds.
Geralt arranged his fingers and hit the burning pile with the sign of Aard.
Not counting on a great result, since it had been weeks without his witcher's elixirs.
But there was a result.
The pile exploded and disintegrated, squirting sparks.
'Follow me!' He yelled, slashing the temple of a Nilfgaardian who had rise above the barricade.
'Follow me! Through the fire!' They followed after him.
Throwing spears of burning branches with their bare hands at the Nilfgaardian horses.
A baptism of fire, thought the witcher, frantically slashing all around him.
I had to pass through a baptism of fire to save Ciri.
And now I go through a fire in battle, that generally I do not care about.
Which in general I don't understand.
The fire, which was to purify me, simply burns my hair and face.
The blood that was splattered hissed and steamed.
'Forward, by the gods! Cahir! To me!' 'Geralt!' Cahir pulled another Nilfgaardian from his saddle.
'To the bridge! Protect the bridge! We must tighten the defence...' He did not finish because out of the smoke came a galloping horseman in a black breastplate, without a helmet, his hair bloodied and dishevelled.
Cahir parried a blow from his long sword, but fell off of his horse's rump.
The Nilfgaardian stooped to nail him to the ground.
But he did not finish the move.
On his forearm shone a silver scorpion.
'Cahir!' he cried in amazement.
'Cahir aep Ceallach!' 'Morteisen...' Cahir, stretched on the ground, said in a voice no less astonished.
A dwarvern mercenary, who ran alongside Geralt, dressing in a doublet that was burned and charred, lost no time in amazement at all.
With a flourish he thrust his spear into the belly of the Nilfgaardian, pushing the pole in far then yanked it out.
Another came and pressed his heavy boot onto the breastplate of the fallen and stabbed a spear into his throat.
The Nilfgaardian issued a gasp, vomited blood and scratched the earth with his spurs.
At that moment the witcher was hit in the back with something very heavy and hard.
His knees buckled under him.
He fell and heard a great roar of triumph.
He saw the riders in black cloaks flee into the forest.
He heard the bridge rumble under the hooves of the horses approaching from the left bank, cavalry, carrying a flag with an eagle surrounded by red diamonds.
And so ended the great Battle for the Bridge on the Yaruga, a battle that in latter chronicles, of course, does not even get the slightest mention.
*** 'Do not be troubled, noble sir,' said the surgeon, while massaging and tapping the witcher's back.
'The bridge was demolished.
We chased the enemy to the opposite shore.
Your friends and the lady are also safe.
Is she your wife?' 'No.' 'Oh, I thought...
It is terrible, my lord, when war harms the pregnant...' 'Be silent, not a word about it.
Whose are these banners?' 'You do not know for whom you fought? Surprise, surprise...
This is the army of Lyria.
You see the black eagle of Lyria and the red diamonds of Rivia.
Well, I'm finished.
It was just a contusion.
Your back will hurt for a while, but it's nothing serious.
You'll recover.' 'Thanks.' 'It's me who should be thanking you.
If you had not defended the bridge, Nilfgaard would have exterminated us to the last; we would have been thrown into the river.
We would not have had time to escape persecution...
You saved the Queen! Farewell, my lord.
I'm going, other wounded need my help.' 'Thanks.' He sat on a tree stump, tired, sore and uncaring.
Alone.
Cahir had disappeared somewhere.
Between the piles in the middle of the broken bridge the Yaruga flowed green and gold, gleaming in the glare from the sunset.
He raised his head, hearing steps, the clatter of hooves and armour.
'That's him, Your Majesty.
Let me help you down...' 'I'm fine.' Geralt raised his head.
The woman who stood before him in armour had very fair hair, almost as white as his own.
He realised that the hair was not white, but grey, but the woman's face showed no signs of aging.
Maturity, yes.
But not old age.
The woman press to her mouth a cambric handkerchief with lace edges.
The handkerchief was covered in blood.
'Stand up, sir,' one of the knights, standing next to Geralt whispered.
'Offer up tribute.
This is the Queen.' The Witcher stood up.
He bowed, overcoming the pain in his loins.
'Tyf defended moft?' 'What?' The woman removed the handkerchief from her mouth and spat blood.
Some of the red droplets fell onto her breastplate.
'Her Majesty, Meve, Queen of Lyria and Rivia,' said one of the knights standing beside the woman, who was dressed in a purple cloak adorned with gold embroidery, 'asks whether you are the man who heroically defended the bridge over the Yaruga?' 'It just happened.' 'Wyflo!' the queen attempted to laugh, but did not succeed.
She frowned, then cursed, although unclear and spat again.
Before she was able to cover her mouth, he saw a terrible wound and noticed the lack of several teeth.
She caught his eye.
'The attack,' she said from behind the handkerchief, looking into his eyes.
'Jakif fkurwyfyn slammed me in the mouth.' 'Queen Meve,' the man in the purple cloak said emphatically, 'stood in the first line, brave as a knight and stood against the overwhelming forces of Nilfgaard! The wound hurts, but it will not disfigure! You saved her and the whole army.
After some traitors kidnapped the ferry, the bridge was our only hope.
And you heroically defended...' 'Pfeftan, Odo, as fie nazywaf, hero? 'Me?' 'Of course you.' The knight with the purple cloak looked at him menacingly.
'What's wrong with you? Are you wounded? Did you hit your head?' 'No.' 'Then answer, when the queen asks! You can see that she is wounded in the mouth and finds it difficult to speak!' 'Pfeftan, Odo.' The knight in purple bowed, and then looked at Geralt.' 'What is your name?' Who cares, he thought.
I'm sick of all this.
I will not lie.
'Geralt.' 'Geralt from where?' 'Nowhere.' 'No famowy?' Meve redecorated the sand under her feet with splashes of saliva mixed with blood.
'What? No, no family.
Your Royal Highness.' Meve drew her sword.
'Kneel.' He obeyed, still unable to believe what was happening.
Still thinking about Milva and the way he chose for her, fearing the Ysgith marsh.
The queen turned to Purple.
'You powief formula.
I can not spweak.' 'For unprecedented valour in battle for a just cause,' Purple recited emphatically, 'as proof of your virtue, honour and fidelity to the crown, I, Meve, by the grace of the gods, queen of Lyria and Rivia, By my power, right and privilege knight thee.
Serve faithfully.
Accept this accolade, one that will not hurt.' Geralt felt a blow on the shoulder blade.
He looked into the pale green eyes of the queen.
Meve spit, thick and red, pressed a handkerchief to her face and winked at him from over the lace.
Purple walked over to the queen and whispered.
The Witcher heard the words –"predicate", "red diamonds", "banner" and "tribute".
'Slufilie,' Meve nodded.
She spoke more clearly, overcoming the pain from the gap in her broken teeth.
'You held the bridge together with the soldiers of Rivia, valiant Geralt of nowhere.
Thus this honour, ha, ha.
Well, it gives me great privilege to knight – Geralt of Rivia.
Ha, ha.' 'Bow, sir knight,' Purple hissed.
Geralt of Rivia, the knight bowed to Queen Meve, his sovereign, who did not see his smile, a bitter smile, over which he had no control.