chapter one 

The bushes rustled with birds.
The slope of the ravine was overgrown, a dense mass of brambles and barberry, a perfect place to nest and prey.
No wonder, then, that they were full of birds.
Stubborn greenfinches, nerds and warblers chirping, every sound resonated, every moment the sonorous "pink-pink" of finches.
Chaffinches warning of rain, thought Milva, instinctively glancing at the sky.
There were no clouds.
But the finches were calling.
We could use a little rain at last.
The place in front of the ravine was an excellent post, giving potential for a successful hunt, especially here in Brokilon, a wild forest full of beasts.
The dryads who controled a large area of the forest rarely hunted, and men even more rarely dared to venture here.
Here, an avid hunter of meat or hides itself became the object of hunting.
Brokilon dryads had no mercy for intruders.
Milva had experienced this first hand.
In any case, animals were not lacking in Brokilon.
However, Milva had lay in ambush for over two hours and still she had not spent a single arrow.
You could not hunt on your feet here– a drought had prevailed for several months leaving the leaves crisp underfoot, dry branches creaked with every step.
Under such conditions, only stillness in the ambush could lead to eventual success and reward.
An admiral butterfly delicately landed itself on the neck of her bow.
Unflinching, Milva watched it as it folded and unfolded its wings, looking simultaneously at her bow, a new acquisition, which she had still not ceased to find pleasure in.
She was an archer by trade, she loved a good weapon, and that weapon which she held was the best of the best.
Milva had used many bows in her lifetime.
She had learned to shoot from the ordinary ash and yew, but soon abandoned them in favour of reflective laminate, which the dryads and elves used.
Elven bows were shorter, lighter and more manageable, and thanks to the layered composition of wood and animal tendons they were also much "faster".
An arrow fired from them reached its target in a much shorter time and at a flatter trajectory, which largely eliminated the possibility of it being swept away by the wind.
The best examples of such weapons, bent four times, bore the name Zefhar, a runic character created for the handle of the bows' curved arc.
Milva had used a Zefhar for quite a few years and thought there could not be a bow that surpassed them.
But she had finally found such a bow.
This was of course in the Cidaris Hrakim Bazaar, famous for its rich supply of strange and unusual goods brought by sailors from the far corners of the world, everywhere where frigates and galleons could reach.
Milva whenever she could, went to visit the bazaar and peruse the arches.
This was precisely where she had acquired the arc that she thought was going to serve her for many years, a Zerrikanian Zehfar, reinforced with carved antelope horn.
She thought this bow to be perfect.
It only lasted a year, for one year later, at the same stall, with the same merchant, she found a veritable wonder.
The bow came from the far North.
It had a wingspan of sixty-two inches.
It was crafted from mahogany, had a perfectly poised grip and a smooth neck with laminated layers of woven wood, whale bones and tendons.
It was clear from the other arches lying next to it that they differed not only in construction and craftsmanship, but in price - and its price was precisely what had drawn Milva's attention.
When, however, she took the bow in her hands and tested it, she paid without hesitation and without even haggling over the price which the merchant had asked.
Four hundred Novigrad crowns.
Needless to say, she did not carry such an extortionate sum.
She managed to strike a deal and sacrificed her Zehfar, a string of sable – the fruit of her poaching activity, a medal and a marvelous Elven locket, a crimped coral cameo boredered with river pearls.
But she did not regret it.
Never.
The arch had an incredible lightness and was accurate to perfection.
Although not too long, hiding in the composite entwined a considerbale distance of wire.
Equipped with silk-hemp string and velvet accurately stretched over the protruding handles twenty-four inches, to give the tension precisely fifty-five pounds of power.
True, there were arches which gave even eighty, but Milva considered this to be an exaggeration.
Fired from her bow, an arrow penetrated two hundred feet within a heartbeat, and at a hundred paces had more than enough momentum to effectively strike a deer and a man if he wore no armor, pierced through.
Milva rarely hunted animals larger than deer, or men in heavy armor.
The butterfly flew away.
Finches still rustled in the bushes.
And still nothing came into shot.
Milva leaned against the trunk of the pine, and began to remember.
Just to kill time.
*** Her first meeting with the witcher occurred in July, two weeks after the events on the island Thanedd and the outbreak of war in Dol Angra.
Milva returned to Brokilon after a few days absence, bringing with her the remains of a group of Scoia'tael commandos, who had been stranded in Temeria while trying to enter territory under Aedirn which was already involved in the war.
The Squirrels had wanted to join the uprising of elves in Dol Blathanna.
They had failed, and if it wasn't for for Milva, they would have been killed.
Milva had helped them by offering asylum in Brokilon.
Immediately after her arrival she was informed that Aglais urgently awaited her in the Col Serrai.
Milva was truthfully a little surprised by this.
Aglais was the prioress of healing in Brokilon, and the deep, full, hot springs and caves of Col Serrai valley was a place of healing.
However, she obeyed the summons, convinced that it was some elf being treated who wanted contact with his detachment through her.
When she saw the wounded witcher and found out what he wanted, she flew into a veritable frenzy, running out of the cave with her hair wild and unloaded all of her anger onto Aglais.
"He saw me! He saw my face! Do you even comprehend what that threatens me?" "No, I do not understand." the healer replied coldly, "This is Gwynbleidd, witcher, friend of Brokilon.
There are fourteen days from the new moon.
It will be some time before he can get up and walk normally.
He wants news of the world, news of his loved ones.
Only you can deliver it to him." "News from the world? I think you have lost your mind, dryad! Do you know what is happening now in the world, beyond the boundaries of your quiet forest? The war continues in Aedirn! In Brugge, in Temeria and Redania.
There is chaos, hell, great persecution! Those who launched a rebellion on Thanedd, are wanted everywhere! Breathe a single word at the wrong time to enlighten them and you'll be with the executioner and his red-hot iron in the dungeon! And I have to go to spy, to inquire, to gather news? Risk my neck? And for whom? For some half-dead witcher? And you say he's not a stranger to me, but a friend? You truly have lost your wits, Aglais!" "If you're going to scream" The dryad calmly interrupted, "let us go further into the forest.
He needs tranquility." Milva glanced involuntarily through the cave, in which she had just seen the wounded man.
Handsome, she thought instinctively, though thin as a stick ...
A white head of hair, but the flat belly of a youngster, the kind associated with labour, not bacon and beer ...
"He was on Thanedd," said Milva, not looking for an answer "A Rebel." "I do not know." shrugged Aglais.
"He's wounded and needs help.
The rest is not my business." Milva pouted.
The healer was known for her reluctance to talk.
But Milva had already had time to hear the accounts from excited Dryads on the Eastern borders of Brokilon, about the events that had occured two weeks before.
About a chestnut-haired sorceress who had appeared in Brokilon in a flash of magic with a wounded man, his arms and feet broken, clinging to her.
The wounded man was the witcher, known as Gwynbleidd, White Wolf.
Initially, the dryads had not known what to do.
The bleeding witcher screamed and fainted, as Aglais applied makeshift dressings to his wounds.
The sorceress who had brought him, looked on, swearing and crying.
Upon hearing this, Milva was greatly shocked – has anyone ever seen a sorceress mourn? And then came the order from Duen Canella, from Eithne with eyes of silver, the Lady of Brokilon.
The Sorceress read the order from the ruler of the Forest Dryads.
The witcher was to be cared for here.
They healed him.
Milva had seen with her own eyes.
He lay in the cave, in a trough filled with the water of magical Brokilon essences, his immobilized limbs lay in rails and his legs were enveloped in a thick sheepskin and healing vines called conynhael, or purple comfrey.
His hair was white as milk.
He was conscious, and though people treated with conynhael usually raved senselessly, magic could also speak through them ...
"No?" The dispassionate voice of the healer snatched her away from her thoughts, "How will it be then? What should I tell him?" "Let him go to the Devil." Milva growled, tugging at her belt from which hung a pouch and a hunting knife, "And you too can go to the devil, Aglais." "This is your will.
I cannot force you." "You're right, you cannot force me." She went into the forest, moving between the pines.
She did not look back.
She was furious.
Milva knew of the events that took place during July's first new moon on Thanedd, the Scoia'tael talked about it incessantly.
During the congress of sorcerers on the island there had been a rebellion, blood was shed and heads had rolled.
The armies of Nilfgaard, as if right on cue, struck Aedirn and Lyria, the war had begun.
In Temeria, Redania and Kaedwen, all blame fell on the Squirrels.
Firstly, being because apparently the Scoia'tael had come to the aid of the rebels and sorcerers on Thanedd isle.
Secondly because Vizimir, the king of Redania, murdered with a stylus, was killed at the hands of an elf or a half-elf.
So humans hated the Squirrels.
Everywhere seethed like a cauldron, and a river of elven blood flowed ...
Ha, she thought, maybe it's true, what the priests ranted, that the end of the world is nigh and the Day of Judgement is upon us? The world is in flames, and men have become like wolves, not only to elves, but to other men.
Brother against brother ...
And a witcher, mixed up in this political rebellion.
A witcher, who after all is there to protect humans against the monsters that hurt them! Since the world began, never has a witcher involved himself in politics or war.
Why, there is even a story of a foolish king, who carried water in a colander, fancied a rabbit as a messenger, and a witcher as a governer.
But here you have it, a witcher badly wounded in a rebellion against kings, escaping his punishment in Brokilon.
Indeed, it is the end of the world! "Hello, Maria." She shivered.
The dryad leaned against a pine, her eyes and hair were silver.
The setting sun shone a halo on her head silhouetted against the mottled background of the forest wall.
Milva knelt on one knee, head bowed low.
"Hail Lady Eithne." The ruler of Brokilon released a golden knife from her belt, in the shape of a sickle.
"Rise," she said.
"Let us walk.
I want to talk with you." A long time passed as they walked through the woods cloaked in shadow, the tall silver haired dryad and the girl with flaxen hair.
Neither interrupted the silence.
"We have not come by Duen Canella yet, Maria." "There is no time Lady Eithne.
For Duen Canella slips away from the road, and I ...
You know" "I know.
You are tired?" "The Elves need help.
So I help them, in accordance with your orders." "At my request." "Absolutely, at your request." "I have another one to make." "That's what I thought.
The witcher?" "Help him." Milva stopped, turned, and with a sharp movement snatched a twig of honeysuckle that obstructed her path.
She turned it between her fingers, before throwing it to the ground.
"For half a year,"she said quietly, looking into the silvery eyes of the dryad, "I gamble with my own head, I bring the elven commandos to Brokilon ...
When they have rested and you have healed their wounds, I take them home ...
Is it too little? Have I not done enough? At each new moon I head back on a trail in deepest night ...
I fear the Sun like a bat or an owl who..." "Nobody knows the forest paths better than you." "In the woods I do not learn of anything.
The witcher said he wants me to gather news, to go amongst the people.
He is a rebel, and to say his name makes the an'givare prick their ears.
I cannot show myself in the towns.
What if someone were to recognize me? The vivid memories are still fresh in my mind, the blood is not yet dry ...
Because, alot of blood was shed.
Lady Eithne." "Quite a alot" The silver dryads old eyes were strange, cold, impenetrable.
"Quite alot, it's true." "You know me, I will be threaded to a stake." "You are prudent.
You are careful and vigilant." "The news that the witcher asked about, you can forget vigilance, I will need to ask questions.
But these days it is too dangerous to show even curiosity.
If they catch me ..." "You have contacts." "They will torture me.
Kill me.
Or I will rot in Drakenborg..." "You are indebted to me." Milva turned her head, biting her lips.
"Yes," she said bitterly.
"I am not able to forget." She closed her eyes, her face suddenly contracted, her mouth quivering, her teeth firmly clenched.
Under her pale eyelids, adorned with moon glow, shone ghostly memories of that night.
Again the sudden pain in the ankle, trapped in the leather loop, pain shooting through her joints, torn by the pulling.
The violent quake of the trees ringing in her ears ...
Cries, moans, wild and frantic, the panicked feeling and terror that descended on her, when she realized that she could not break free ...
Screams and fear, horsetail rope, rough dark and twisted, the swinging, unnatural, inverted earth, inverted sky, trees, inverted corners, pain, the blood in her temples pulsating ...
And at dawn, dryads round a ring of flowers ...
Distant silvery laughter ...
A puppet on a string! Swing, swing puppet, head down ...
And her own cries, so pervasive, so alien.
And then darkness.
"True, I have a debt" through clenched teeth she repeated.
" Yes, I was saved by your generous hands that cut the deadly rope.
Whilst I live, I see, I have not payed off this debt." "Everyone has some debt," said Eithne.
"Such is life, Maria Barring.
Debts and claims, obligations, aknowledgements, payments ...
Doing something for someone.
Or maybe for yourself? Because in reality, you always pay yourself, not others.
Every debt is repaid to ourselves.
In each of us lies both creditor and debtor.
What matters is that we agreed to this bill.
We come into the world with a pinch of life given to us then all we do is get and repay debts.
To ourselves.
For ourselves.
To that end, the account is settled." "This man ...
the witcher ...
it he close to you, Lady Eithne? " "Yes.
Although he does not know it.
Return to the Col Serrai, Maria Barring.
Go now, and do what he asks." *** From a mound of brush, a twig snapped.
The birds launched their furious noise, "Check-check".
The magpies and finches broke into flight, their tail feathers flashing white.
Milva gasped.
Finally.
"Check-check," called a magpie.
"Check-check-check." Again, a twig snapped.
Milva adjusted the worn to a shine leather protector on her left forearm, held together with a bunch of grips attached to a loop.
She plunged a hand into the quiver on her thigh.
Instinctively, out of habit she inspected the blade tip and fletching.
The blades were bought from market – she choose on average just one out of ten offered to her - but she always feathered the arrows herself.
With most commercially available ready-made arrows, the feathers were too short and arranged directly over the pole, while Milva applied hers to fin in a spiral, lying no shorter than five inches.
She readied an arrow onto the string of her bow and looked out over the ravine inbetween a patch of verdant barberry trunks with clusters of red berries which stood out from the rest of the trees.
The finches flew not far away, resuming their song.
Come on, little deer, she thought, lifting and stretching the bow.
Come on.
I'm ready.
But the deer moved away from the ravine, towards the marshy springs flowing into the Ribbon.
The young deer rose from the valley.
A beautiful beast.
At a glance it could weigh forty pounds.
He raised his head, pricked up his ears, then turned to the brush and crunched a few leaves.
It was easier to shoot it from behind.
If it werent for the trunk covering her target Milva would have fired without hesitation.
Even reaching the stomach, the tip would have pierced the animal and touched the heart, liver or lungs.
Upon hitting the thigh, it would sever the artery, and the animal would fall soon after.
She waited, not releasing the chord.
The deer again raised its head, took a step, went behind the trunk – advancing slightly.
Milva, maintaining the bow at full stretch, cursed silently.
A shot from the front might fail: instead of planting in the lung, the tip could pierce the stomach.
She waited, holding her breath, feeling the salty taste of the chord at the corners of her lips.
This was one, almost inestimable advantage of her bow - a heavier weapon or one less perfect, she could not have held for so long in suspense, without the risk of hand fatigue and poor accuracy in her shot.
Fortunately, the deer lowered his head, nibbling a few blades of grass that sprang from the moss, turning sideways.
Milva breathed calmly, aimed for the chest, and gently released the bowstring with her fingers.
But she did not hear the snap that was expected of the ribs pierced by the arrow.
The deer jumped up, kicked and disappeared to the sound of dry branches and trampled leaves.
For a few heartbeats Milva stood motionless, like a marble statue of a petrified goddess in the forest.
Only when all the noises had subsided, she removed her right hand from her left cheek, lowering the bow.
Noting the escape route of the animal in the corner of her memory, she sat quietly, propping her back against the trunk.
She was an experienced hunter, she had trotted in from the woods since childhood, having shot her first deer at eleven, and a fourteen-horns stag - an extremely happy hunting omen - on her fourteenth birthday.
But experience had taught her that pursuit of a wounded animal was pointless.
If you hit well, the deer had fallen no more than two hundred paces from the escape route.
If you had hit badly - in fact she could not rule out such a possibility - rushing could only make matters worse.
After a flight in panic, a badly injured animal, undisturbed will slow its pace.
A hunted animal will race at breakneck speed and not slow down for quite some time.
She had half an hour at least.
She stuck between her teeth a blade of grass she had pulled from the ground and plunged back into her memories.
*** When, after twelve days, she returned to Brokilon, the witcher was already walking.
He limped slightly and imperceptibly dragged his leg, but still walked.
Milva was not surprised - she knew about the miraculous healing properties of the water and the forest weed, conynhael.
She knew too of Aglaia's skills, more than once she had witnessed the rapid healing of wounded Dryads.
And, obviously, the rumors about the robustness and the extraordinary resistance of witchers were not fabricated.
Upon her arrival, she did not go to the Col Serrai though the dryads knew Gwynbleidd eagerly awaited her return.
She delayed the meeting deliberately, she was still not happy that she had been given the mission and wanted to express her displeasure.
She escorted the Squirrel commandos to the camp, and gave a lengthy account of the events that had passed, warning the dryads against the blockade on the border by the Ribbon, organised by the humans.
Only when she was reminded for the third time, Milva took a bath, changed and went to the witcher.
He waited for her on the edge of a clearing, where cedars grew.
He walked around from time to time, sat down, then straightened himself elastically.
It was clear Aglaia had recommended some exercises.
"What news?" He asked immediately after their greeting.
The coldness in his voice did not deceive her.
"The war draws to an end, probably," she said, shrugging her shoulders.
"Nilfgaard, they say, practically destroyed Lyria and Aedirn.
Verden surrendered and the king of Temeria arranged a pact with Nilfgaard.
The elves in the Valley of Flowers have established their own kingdom.
But the Scoia'tael of Temeria and Redania have not settled there.
They continue to fight..." "That's not what I was looking for." "No?" she said feigning surprise.
"It's true...
yes.
I went through Dorian, as you asked me to, although it extended my journey.
And the roads right now, are not safe ..." She paused, stretched.
This time he urged her to continue.
"This Codringher,"she finally asked "Whom you made me visit, he was your friend?" The witcher's face did not move, but Milva knew that he had understood.
"No.
He was not." "That's good" she continued freely.
"Because he is no longer among the living.
He burned together with his work, all that remains is a chimney and part of the wall.
The whole of Dorian is full of gossip.
Some talk that this Codringher practiced witchcraft and upon brewing his potions he entered into a pact with the devil, so he was consumed by the fires of hell.
Others say that he had stuck his nose where it should not be as usual, and of course this would not please some, so they simply murdered him and made a fire to cover their tracks.
What about you, what do you think?" She recieved no response, and could not read the witchers face, which was dull of emotion.
She continued therefore, and without losing the malicious and arrogant tone.
"It's strange that the fire and the death of that Codringher took place during the first moon of July, at exactly the same time as the riots on the island of Thanedd.
As if someone had guessed that Codringher knew something precisely about the disorder and would be questioned about the details.
As if they had wanted to shut him up for eternity, before he made any revelations.
What do you say? Ha, I see, you say nothing.
Since you care so little, then I'll tell you: I will inform you that your little shennigans, your questionings and spying activites are dangerous.
They might want to close the mouths and cut off the ears of others such as Codringher.
Well, thats how I see it." "Forgive me." he said after a moment.
"You're right.
I exposed you.
It was too dangerous a job for ..." "For a woman, yes?" She tossed her head, and threw back her hair which was still damp.
"Thats what you wanted to say? My word, I came across a gentleman! Are you stupid? Although I have to squat to pee, my hood is made of wolf fur, not rabbit hair! Do not pass me off as a coward, you do not know me!" "I know" he said quietly and calmly, seeming oblivious to her wrath, "You Milva, help the Squirrels to escape death and accompany them to Brokilon.
I know of your courage.
But foolishly and selfishly I exposed you ..." "You idiot!" she interrupted sharply.
"You should not be worrying about me, but for yourself.
The sooner the better!" She smiled mockingly, because this time, his face changed.
She deliberately remained silent, waiting for the questions he was about to ask.
"What do you know? " He asked finally.
"And from whom?" "You had your Codringher" she snorted, proudly raising her head "I have my contacts.
Those who have keen eyes and ears." "Speak.
Please, Milva." "Following the riots on Thanedd" she began after a short silence, "Things started to heat up everywhere.
The hunt for traitors began.
Particularly for those sorcerers, who had sided with Nilfgaard, and also some other mercenaries.
Some were caught.
Others disappeared, like rocks dropped in water.
It doesn't take a great mind to guess where they escaped to, under whose wings they took shelter.
But it isn't just witches and traitors who are hunted.
The rebellion of renegade wizards was aided by a group of Squirrels, whos commander was the famous Faoiltiarna.
He is wanted.
An order was issued that each elf caught must be tortured and interrogated about the commando Faoiltiarna." "Who is this Faoiltiarna?" "An elf, a Scoia'tael.
He made life difficult for many people.
There is a high price on his head.
And that is not the only head sought.
They are also looking for some Nilfgaardian knight, who was on Thanedd.
And yet ..." "Speak." "The an'giyare inquires about a witcher named Geralt of Rivia and a little girl named Cirilla.
They were ordered to take those two alive.
Under order of execution: it is forbidden to touch a hair on their heads or a button on their clothes.
Ha! You must be dear to their hearts as they seem remarkably concerned for your health..." She paused, seeing the expression on his face, which suddenly appeared inhumanly calm.
She realized that despite her attempts, she had failed to scare him.
At least not about his own skin.
Suddenly, she felt ashamed.
"Well, their hunt will be futile." she said in gentler tone, but still with a slightly mocking smile on her lips.
"You're safe in Brokilon.
And they won't take the girl alive.
When they searched the rubble on Thanedd, the magical tower, the one which collapsed ...
Hey there! What's up?" The witcher staggered, leaning against a cedar, then sat down heavily on a tree stump.
Milva jumped, frightened by the pallor that had suddenly covered his face.
"Aglais! Sirssa! Fauve! To me, quickly! Damn, death has come for him! Hurry!" "Do not call them ...
I'm all right - Speak.
I want to know ..." Milva suddenly understood.
"They found nothing in the rubble!" She cried, feeling herself now turn pale.
"Nothing! They turned every stone and cast spells, but they could not find ..." She wiped the sweat from her brow, and gestured at the dryads who came.
She seized the witcher, who was still seated, by the shoulders and leaned over him so that her long blond hair fell on his pale face.
"You misunderstood," she repeated quickly, clumsily, having difficulty finding the right thing to say in the rush of words that seemed to be crowding her mouth.
"I just wanted to say that ...
you understood me wrong.
Because I ...
How could I have known that you are so ...
No ...
I did it on purpose.
I just said that the girl ...
That they will not find her, because she vanished without a trace, like the sorcerers.
Forgive me." He did not answer.
He looked to the side.
Milva bit her lip, clenched her fists.
"In three days I leave Brokilon." she announced softly after a long, very long silence.
"By the time the full moon disappears, when the nights darken a bit.
After ten days I will return, perhaps sooner.
Just after Lammas, the first days of August.
Do not be upset.
If I must move heaven and earth, i will discover everything.
If anyone knows anything about this girl, you'll know too." "Thanks, Milva." "In ten days ...
Gwynbleidd." "I'm Geralt.
" he said, holding out his hand.
She pressed it firmly, without hesitation.
"I'm Maria Barring." With a nod and a shadow of a smile on his face, he thanked her for her honesty.
She knew he had appreciated it.
"Be careful, please.
Be mindful of who you speak to before asking questions." "Have no worries for me." "Your informants ...
You trust them?" "I do not trust anyone." *** "The witcher is in Brokilon.
Among the Dryads." "Yes thats what I thought." Dijkstra folded his arms over his chest.
"But its good to have confirmation." He was silent for a moment.
Lennep licked his lips.
He waited.
"Well, its good to have confirmation." repeated the chief of intelligence of the kingdom Redania, pensively, as if speaking to himself.
"It is always better to be certain.
Eh, even if it turned out that Yennefer is with him ...
There is no sorceress with him, Lennep?" "What?" the agent started.
"No, sir.
There is no sorceress.
What are the orders? If you want him to live, I will lure him from Brokilon.
But if however he fetches a higher price dead ..." "Lennep," Dijkstra looked upon his agent's cold, shiny eyes.
"Do not be overzealous.
In our profession overzealousness never pays.
And always seems suspicious." "But sir," Lennep paled slightly.
"I just wanted ..." "I know.
You were just asking what my command is.
My command is: leave the the witcher alone." "At your command.
And what about Milva?" "Leave her alone too now.
For the time being..." "At your command.
May I withdraw?" "You may." The agent left the room, cautiously and quietly closing the oak door.
Dijkstra was silent for a long time, staring at the piles of paper on the table, maps, letters, denunciations, minutes of hearings and death sentences.
"Ori!" The secretary raised his head and coughed, clearing his throat, but remained silent.
"The witcher is in Brokilon." Ori Reuven coughed again, instinctively glancing at the table, and leveling his eyes on the feet under it.
Dijkstra followed his gaze.
"That's right.
I do not forgive him." he growled.
"For two weeks I could not walk.
I lost face to Philippa - I had to whine like a dog and ask for her bloody witchcraft, otherwise I'd still be limping.
Well, I myself should not have underestimated him.
The worst part is, I can't even get my revenge and kick his arse, I personally do not have the time, and I can't even use any of my people to settle a private matter! I can't, Ori, can I?" "Hem, hem ..." "No need to grunt.
I know.
Ah, hell, how that power is tempting! I am itching to use it.
It is easy to forget it is there, but if you use it, there are no limits ...
Is Philippa Eilhart still holed up in Montecalvo?" "Yes." "Take a pen and inkwell.
I'll dictate a letter for her.
Write ...
Damn it, I can't concentrate.
What are those bloody screams, Ori? What's going on in the square?" "Students are throwing stones at the Nilfgaardian ambassadors residence.
We paid them for it, hem, hem, I think." "Aha.
All right.
Close the window.
Tomorrow they will go bombard the bank of the dwarf Giancardi.
He refused to disclose to me who has accounts there." "Giancardi, hem, hem, gave a substantial sum to fund the war." "Ha.
Then let the students go bomb the banks who gave sod all." "All of them gave something." "Ah, you're boring, Ori.
Write, I say.
"My dear beloved Phil, the sun of my ..." Damn, I always get confused.
Take a new sheet.
Ready?" "Yes, hem, hem." ""Dear Philippa.
Miss Triss Merigold is definately concerned about the fate of the witcher, whom she teleported from Thanedd to Brokilon.
Making this fact a profound secret even from me, hurt me terribly.
But you can reassure her.
The witcher is fine now.
He's even started sending a Brokilon emissary with the task of finding traces of the princess Cirilla, the young one who has so interetested you all.
Our friend Geralt apparently does not know that Cirilla is in Nilfgaard where she is being prepared for her marriage to Emperor Emhyr.
The witcher must be anxious as he sits quietly in Brokilon, so I will try to send him this news." You finished writing yet?" "Hem, hem, "...send him this news."" "New paragraph.
"I wonder ..." Ori, wipe the pen, damn it! We are writing to Philippa, not to the royal council, the letter has to look aesthetically pleasing! New paragraph.
"I wonder why the witcher is not seeking contact with Yennefer.
I find it hard to believe that his affection bordering on obsession just suddenly evaporated, regardless of his political ideals.
On the other hand, if Yennefer was the one who led Cirilla to Emhyr and if I were to find evidence of this, it would make me very glad to inform the witcher as well.
The problem would solve itself, I am sure that treacherous black-haired beauty would not anticipate the day nor the hour.
The Witcher does not like it when someone touches his little girl, Artaud Terranova conclusively found that out on Thanedd.
I would like to believe, Phil, that you do not withhold evidence of Yennefer's treason and do not know where she is hiding.
I would be very sorry if it turned out, that there is another secret kept from me.
I have no secrets from you ..." What are you laughing, Ori?" "Nothing! Hem, hem." "Write! "I have no secrets from you, Phil, and I hope that the same is true for you.
With my deepest regards, et cetera, et cetera." Here, let me sign." Ori Reuven sprinkled the letter with sand.
Dijkstra sat comfortably, with his hands clasped on his stomach, and began twiddling his thumbs.
"This Milva, the one who spies for the witcher," Dijkstra asked, "What can you tell me about her?" "She is, hem, hem," grunted the Secretary "Responsible for taking the survivors of Scoia'tael groups broken by the Temerian army to Brokilon.
She helps the elves to escape, allowing them to rest and re-form into their commando units ..." "Spare me the information thats already known publicly," interrupted Dijkstra.
"I am aware of Milva's activity, and I intend to gather more evidence on it.
Were it not for that I would have thrown her to the Temerians a long time ago.
What else can you tell me about her? About her personal life?" "Originally, I believe, she is from some godforsaken village in Upper Sodden.
Her real name is Maria Barring.
Milva is a nickname, which was given to her by the dryads.
In the Elder Speech it means ..." "Kite." Dijkstra interrupted."I know." "She came from a family of hunters and foresters.
The family trade was passed down from father to son.
When the eldest son was crushed in an accident, the old Barring decided to teach the art of the forest to his daughter.
When he died, her mother remarried.
Hem, hem ...
Maria did not get along with her stepfather and ran away from home.
She was, I believe, sixteen years old.
She travelled north, living from hunting, but she did not have an easy life in the baron forests, all alone and hunting like a beast.
So she started to poach in Brokilon and there, hem, hem, the dryads caught her." "And instead of killing her, the let her go," Dijkstra muttered.
"having recognized her as one of them.
As for Milva ...
she returned the favour.
She made a deal with the Witch of Brokilon, with the old Lady Eithne Eyes of Silver.
Maria Barring is dead, long live Milva ...
How many expeditions did she arrange before you in Verden and Kerack discovered the truth about it? Three?" "Hem, hem ...
Four, I believe ..." although he had an infallible memory, Oriemu Reuven was still afraid of making mistakes, "A total of around a hundred people, among the fiercest of the lot, the scalps of Mamun, were killed.
For a long time we could not work it out because sometimes Milva would take it upon herself to prevent a massacre, and by the heavens, the survivors praised her bravery.
It was only the fourth time, in Verden, I believe, someone finally slapped himself on the forehead.
"How is it," they so suddenly exclaimed, hem, hem, "that the guide that so often is attacked, each time is left alive?"And thats how she came to be discovered, the tour guide leads, but to a hunters trap, directly under the arrows of the Dryads waiting in ambush ..." Dijkstra pushed the minutes of a hearing to the edge of his desk, it seemed to him that the parchment still stank of the torture chamber.
"And then,"he took a guess, "Milva vanished to Brokilon without a trace.
But today in Verden it is difficult to find volunteers who are willing to make expeditions to the dryads.
Old and young, Eithne and Milva make a pretty good team.
And they dare to say that provocation is a human invention.
But perhaps..." "Hem, hem?" Ori muttered, surprised by the prolonged silence of his superior.
"Perhaps they have started to learn something from our methods." the spy coolly finished, gazing at the denunciations, records of hearings and death sentences on his table.
*** Seeing no blood anywhere, Milva became concerned.
She remembered suddenly that the deer had taken a step forward when she had fired.
Either he had, or he had intended to - which would have given the same outcome.
If he had moved, the arrow could have hit him in the stomach.
Milva cursed.
A shot in the belly, it was a curse and a disgrace to the hunter! Bad luck! Pah, pish, poor devil! She ran quickly to the slope of the hill, searching intently through the brambles, moss and ferns.
She was looking for her arrow.
Equipped with a four-bezelled tip, so sharp that it shaved the hair on her forearm, launched from a distance of fifty yards, it would have pierced the deer right through.
Milva saw, she had found it.
She breathed a sigh of relief and spat three times, to ward off bad luck.
She needn't have worried, yes, it was better than expected.
The arrow was not covered with the sticky and stinking contents of the stomach.
It did not bear the traces of the clear, pink and foamy substance from the lungs.
The tip was covered with dark, rich red blood.
The tip had pierced the heart.
Milva would not have to sneak or walk on tiptoe for long through the forest.
The deer no doubt lay dead in the thicket, no more than a hundred paces from the clearing, where the traces of blood would lead.
A deer shot in the heart would die after a few jumps, and she knew that she would track it with ease.
After a dozen paces, she found the trail of her prey, and followed it, re-immersing herself in thoughts and memories.
*** She kept her promise to the witcher.
She returned to Brokilon even earlier than promised, five days after the Harvest Festival, five days after the new moon, the beginning of the month of August according to the humans, Lammas for the elves, the seventh, penultimate sayaed of the year.
She crossed the Ribbon at dawn, herself and five elves.
The commando, which she led, initially consisted of nine horses, but mercenaries from Brugge had hunted them the whole time they walked.
Three had attacked about five hundred yards from the river, harassing them, until in the mists of dawn, they began to see Brokilon at the edge of the Ribbon.
The attackers feared Brokilon.
This saved Milva and her group.
They crossed the river.
Exhausted, wounded.
And not all of them had survived.
She had news for the witcher, and she was convinced that Gwynbleidd was still in Col Serrai.
She intended to go to him only around noon, after he had slept his fill.
She was amazed when he suddenly emerged from the fog like a ghost.
Without a word, he sat nearby, watching as she prepared her bed, putting blankets over a pile of branches.
"What, you're in a hurry?" she exclaimed mockingly, "Witcher, I get tired you know.
Day and night in the saddle, I do not even feel my arse, and I'm soaked up to the navel, because at daybreak like wolves, we made our way through the willows in the stream ..." "Please tell me.
Did you learn anything?" "Yes I did." she snorted, unlacing and removing her soaked shoes.
"With little difficulty, because she seems to have caused quite a stir.
You had not mentioned that this young lady was so important! I thought she must be your stepdaughter, she must be one of those poor little unfortunate and abused orphans.
And here we have the princess of Cintra! Ha! And perhaps you are too a prince in disguise?" "Tell me, please." "It would seem the Kings wanted their hands on her, because your Cirilla, from what I learned, was saved from Thanedd and sent straight to Nilfgaard, together with the traitorous sorcerers.
At Nilfgaard she was welcomed with great revelry by Emperor Emhyr.
And you know what? He'd made up his mind to marry her it seems.
And now let me breathe.
If you want, we can resume this conversation when I'm rested." The witcher was silent.
Milva hung out her wet socks on a forked branch, so that the rising sun would dry them out, then pulled off her belt buckle.
"I wish you would not stand there with that dissapproving look," she grumbled, "What better news could you have expected? Nothing threatens you, no questions are asked about you and the spies have stopped caring for you.
As for your damsel, she escaped the king, she will become Empress ..." "You are certain this is the right information?" "Nothing is certain these days," she replied with a yawn, sitting on her bed.
"Except that every day the sun travels frome east to west.
But what they say about the emperor of Nilfgaard and the princess of Cintra must be true.
People talk alot about it." "Why the sudden popularity then?" "As if you do not know! Think...
she will bring Emhyr a good piece of land as a dowry! Not only Cintra, but land on this side of the Jaruga too! Ha, she may even become my empress, since I'm from Upper Sodden and all of Sodden is his domain.
Pfft! Then, one day I'll kill a deer in their forests, and I will hang at her command...
fucking cruel world! Ah curse it, my eyes are heavy ..." "Just one more question.
From these sorceresses ...
That is, of those wizards who had betrayed, some were caught?" "No.
But one of them committed suicide, they say.
After Vengerberg fell, and the army marched into Aedirn and Kaedwen.
Maybe out of grief or fear of torture ..." "The commando which you brought had spare horses, will the elves give me one?" "Aha, I see your anxious to get on the road," she mumbled, wrapping herself in a blanket.
"And I'm thinking that I know where ..." She paused, surprised at the expression on his face.
Suddenly she realized that the news she had brought was not good at all, she didn't really understand anything.
Unexpectedly, she felt the urge to sit down with him, to attack him with questions, listen, give advice perhaps ...
She rubbed her eyes with her knuckles roughly.
I'm exhausted, she thought, death, chased all through the night after my heels.
I need to breathe.
At the end of the day what do I care about his troubles or concerns? What does it matter? And this girl? To hell with him and with her! What a curse, I've lost sleep over this...
The witcher stood up.
"Will the elves give me a horse?" He repeated.
"Take whichever one you want." she said after a moment.
"Just make sure they do not see you.
The mercenaries attacked us on the crossing, it was bloody ...
Oh and do do not touch the Moreau, that one is mine ...
Why are you still standing here?" "Thank you for your help.
For everything." She did not answer.
"I am indebted to you.
How can I repay you?" "How? You can finally go away!" She cried, raising herself onto her elbow and tugging violently at the blanket to cover herself.
"I ...
I want to sleep! Take a horse ...go.
...
To Nilfgaard, to hell, for all I care! Go away! Leave me alone!" "I will pay what I owe you," he said softly.
"I will not forget.
Maybe one day it will be that you will need help, support - an arm to support you.
Then call, call into the night.
And I'll come." *** The deer was on the edge of the slope, his glassy eye pointed to the sky.
The ground was spongey and damp, densely overgrown with fern.
Milva could see an enormous tick planted in the light fawn belly of the animal.
"You will have to find another victim my little critter," she muttered, folding her sleeves and drawing a knife.
"Because this one is already cold." With swift, skillful movements she cut the skin from the breastbone to the anus, cleverly bypassing the reproductive system.
She carefully split the layer of fat, cut the easophogus and with blood up to her elbows, she rummaged through the intestines and gall bladder in search of bezoars.
She did not believe in the magical properties of bezoars, but there was no shortage fools who believed and paid a good price for them.
She took the carcass of the deer and layed him over a log with his belly to the ground to let he blood flow.
She wiped her hands on fern leaves and sat down next to her prey.
"You must be mad or possesed witcher." she said quietly, staring at the wall of Brokilon pines, their crowns suspended a hundred feet above her.
"Going away to Nilfgaard looking for that girl.
Going to the end of the world, to stand in fire, and not even a thought to stock up on provisions.
I know that you live for her, but does it have to be this way?" The trees, of course, did not comment or interrupt her monologue.
"I was thinking," Milva went on, picking the blood from her nails with the knife, "You have no chance of rescuing your young lady.
You will never reach Nilfgaard, or even the Jaruga.
In this state you could not even walk up Sodden.
Your death is already written.
It is written on your stubborn face, you can see it in your own terrifying eyes.
Death will surprise you soon, witcher.
But thanks to this little deer, you will not die of starvation.
And that's a good thing.
Well...
I think." *** Seeing the Nilfgaardian ambassador enter the courtroom, Dijkstra quietly sighed.
Shilard Fitz-Oesterlen, envoy of Emperor Emhyr var Emreis, had a habit of talking in diplomatic terms and loved to weave pompous language and paradoxical turns of phrase into sentences, intelligible only to diplomats and scholars.
Dijkstra had studied at the academy in Oxenfurt and although he had not obtained a master's degree, he knew the basics of the turgid jargon spoken by academics.
He used it reluctantly however, because at heart he could not stand pomp and ceremony, or any of that sort of pretention.
"Welcome, Your Excellency." "Sir Count," Shilard Fitz-Oesterlen bowed ceremoniously.
"Ah, please forgive me.
Maybe now I should say, Grand Duke? Noble and enlightened Prince? Your Highness Secretary of State? Upon my word, your highness, the honors are showered upon you at such a rate that in truth I do not know what title to give you without breaking protocol." "The best is 'Your Majesty'." said Dijkstra modestly.
"You know, after all, Excellency, that the court makes the king.
And you are probably familiar with the fact that when I shout "jump!", the whole court of Tretogor asks, "How high?"" The ambassador knew that Dijkstra was exaggerating, but it wasn't that far from the truth.
Prince Radowid was a minor, Queen Hedwig had been devastated by the tragic death of her husband - the aristocracy, terrified, had become stupid, and was disunited and divided into factions.
In fact, the government of Redania was led by Dijkstra.
He could without difficulty obtain all the honors he wanted.
But he wanted none.
"Your Highness has deigned to call me," the ambassador said after a moment.
"Without the presence of the Minister of Foreign Affairs.
To what do I owe this honor?" "The Minister," Dijkstra raised his eyes to a ceiling, "resigned because of ill health." The ambassador nodded solemnly.
He knew perfectly well that the foreign minister was sitting in the dungeon, and that surely just a swift look at the pre-interview instruments of torture was enough to make him confess any of his collusions with the secret services of Nilfgaard because he was a coward and an idiot.
The ambassador knew that the network organised by the agent Vattiera de Rideaux, head of Imperial Intelligence, had been smashed, and that all the threads were now in the hands of Dijkstra.
He also knew that these threads led directly to him.
But his immunity protected him, and tradition and duty forced him to play the game until the very end.
Especially after the strange coded instructions that Vattier and Stefan Skellen "The Coroner", the imperial agent of special missions, had recently sent to the embassy.
"As a successor has not yet been appointed," began Dijkstra, "The unpleasant duty falls to me, of informing you that your Excellency has been considered persona non grata in the kingdom of Redania." The ambassador bowed.
"It is unfortunate," he said, "that the distrust resulting in the mutual expulsion of the ambassadors arises from facts which do not relate directly to the kingdom of Redania, or the empire of Nilfgaard.
The Empire has taken no hostile action against the Redania." "Apart from the blockade at the mouth of the Skellig Islands and Jaruga for our ships and goods? Aside from arming, and supporting bands of Scoia'tael?" "Those are insinuations." "What about the concentration of the imperial army in Verden and Cintra? The raids by armed bands in Sodden and Brugge? Sodden and Brugge are Temerian protectorates, and while we are in alliance with Temeria, your Excellency, the attacks on Temeria are attacks on us.
The rebellion on the island of Thanedd and assassination of king Vizimir are also issues that relate directly to Redania.
I question the nature of the role that the Empire played in these events." "As for the incident on Thanedd," the ambassador spread his hands, "I am not authorized to express an opinion.
Beyond the scenes of his private affairs, sorcerers are foreign to His Majesty Emhyr var Emreis.
I regret the the marginal effect of our protests against the propaganda which suggests otherwise.
Propaganda enlarged by, as I dare say, and not without the support of the highest authorities of the kingdom Redania." "Your protests surprise me.
And I am extremely surprised, at that." Dijkstra smiled slightly, "After all, the Emperor did not conceal the fact that the Princess of Cintra, who was kidnapped from Thanedd, resides at his court." "Cirilla, Queen of Cintra," Shilard Fitz-Oesterlen corrected insistently, "was not abducted, but sought asylum within the Empire.
It has nothing to do with the incident on Thanedd." "Really?" "The incident on Thanedd," continued the ambassador with a stony face, "deeply disgusted the Emperor.
And the insidious attack committed by a madman against king Vizimir has awakened in him a deep and genuine loathing.
However, it reached its peak when terrible rumors spread amongst the populace, who dare to look upon the Empire as the instigators of this crime." "Recognition of the real instigators," Dijkstra articulated slowly, "will put an end to the gossip, hopefully.
The persecutors will be captured, and justice administered, it is only a matter of time." "Justitia Est Fundamentum Regnorum," answered Shilard Fitz-Oesterlen seriously.
"Crimen horribilis non potest non esse punibile.
I assure you that His Majesty also wishes to see that happen." "It is in the power of the Emperor to grant that desire." Dijkstra tossed in casually, crossing his arms over her chest.
"One of the politicial leaders of the plot, Enid an Gleanna, until recently, known as Francesca Findabair the sorceress, from Imperial benches plays elf queen of the puppet state, Dol Blathanna." "His Imperial Majesty," the ambassador bowed stiffly, "can not interfere in the affairs of Dol Blathanna, an independent kingdom, recognized by all the neighboring powers." "Except for Redania.
To Redania, Dol Blathanna is still part of the kingdom of Aedirn, although you cut Aedirn and Lyria to pieces with the help of the elves of Kaedwen.
You have crossed out these kingdoms from the world map too soon.
Too soon, your Excellency.
However, this is not the time nor the place to discuss it.
Let Francesca Findabair hold the reigns for now, the time for justice will come.
What about the other rebels, and the organizers of the assassination of King Vizimir? Vilgefortz of Roggeveen, and Yennefer of Vengerberg? There is every reason to suppose that after the defeat of the coup they both fled to Nilfgaard." "I assure you," the amabassador lifted his head, "that they did not.
And if they did, I guarantee that they will not escape the punishement they deserve." "They have not sinned against you, so it is not up to you to punish them.
By delivering them, Emperor Emhyr would provide evidence of his sincere desire for justice, after all, Justitia Est Fundamentum Regnorum." "There is no denying the wisdom in your request," admitted Shilard Fitz-Oesterlen, feigning an embarassed laugh.
"Firstly, these people are not within the territory of the Empire.
Secondly, even if they were, there would still be a problem.
The extraditions would have to be carried out following an official ruling, in this case, by the Imperial Council.
Consider, your Highness, that the severance of diplomatic relations is an act of hostility on Redania's part.
It is therefore illogical to expect the Council to grant a request for extradition from a hostile country.
It would be an unprecedented ...
Unless ..." "Unless what?" "You created a precedent." "I do not understand." "If the kingdom of Redania was ready to hand over someone who was considered a felon by the Empire, the Emperor and his Council would have a reason to reciprocate this gesture of goodwill." Dijkstra was silent for a long time, giving the impression of being lost in thought.
"Who is it you want?" "The name of the criminal?" the ambassador pretended to try to remember the name, and finally reached into his briefcase for the document.
"I do apologise, my memory fails me.
I have it here.
Ah yes, a certain Cahir Mawr Dyffryn aep Ceallach.
Undeniably the allegations against him are serious.
He is wanted for murder, desertion, kidnap, rape, theft and forgery of documents.
Fleeing from the wrath of the emperor, he escaped abroad." "To Redania? He chose a long way then." "Your worship," Shilard Fitz-Oesterlen smiled slightly, "he is not limited to Redanian territory.
But I have no doubt that if the offender has been seen in any of the allied kingdoms, your grace would be informed of it from one of his ...
personal relations." "What did you say was the name of this criminal?" "Cahir Mawr Dyffryn aep Ceallach." Dijkstra was silent for a long time, pretending to rack his memory.
"No." he said finally.
"We have not arrested anyone by that name." "Really?" "My memory does not fail me in this instance.
I do apologise, Your Excellency." "I also," said Shilard Fitz-Oesterlen icily.
"Especially since it seems impossible in these conditions, to conduct a mutual extradition of criminals.
I will not annoy your Lordship further.
I wish you health and success." "Good health and good luck." "Mutually.
Good-bye, Your Excellency." The ambassador went out, after some complicated, ceremonial bows.
"Kiss my sempitemum meam, smart ass." Dijkstra muttered, crossing his arms over his chest.
"Ori!" The secretary, red from coughing and grunting, emerged from behind the curtain.
"Philippa is still holed up in Montecalvo?" "Yes, hem, hem.
With her friends Laux-Antille, Merigold and Metz." "Any day war could break out, the border of the Jaruga will explode, and they go and lock themselves up in a wild fortress! Take your pen, and write.
"Beloved Phil ..." Damn!" "I wrote: "Dear Philippa."" "Good, continue.''You might be interested to know, that the oddity in the winged helmet, who disappeared as mysteriously as he appeared on Thanedd, is called Cahir Mawr Dyffryn and is the son of steward Ceallach.
Surprisingly, we are not the only ones looking for this strange individual, but as it turns out, Vattiera de Rideaux and people of that son of a bitch ...'' " "Lady Philippa, hem, hem, does not like such words.
I wrote: "the scoundrel"." "Fine, the scoundrel Stefan Skellena.
''And you know as well as I, dear Phil, that the intelligence services of Emhyr are urgently looking for only those agents and emissaries, who vowed to rip Emhyr apart.
Those who were meant to do his bidding in the cities or die, but betrayed him, their commands left unexecuted.
Things look pretty strange, however we were confident that Cahir was ordered to capture princess Cirilla and deliver her to Nilfgaard.'' New paragraph.
''The matter raised a reasonable amount of suspicion in me and strange though it may be, I have come up with some surprising theories.
However, they are not meaningless, and I would like to discuss them with you in private.
With deepest respect et cetera, et cetera.''" *** She went to the south, straight as an arrow, to the banks of the Ribbon, and after crossing the river, trekked over wet ravines, covered in a soft carpet of bright green moss.
She assumed that the witcher, not knowing the terrain as well as her would not risk crossing by the human side.
By cutting through the huge half circle formed by the river, part of which bulged into Brokilon, she had a chance to catch up.
Travelling quickly and without stopping she even had a chance to overtake him.
The finches sang, and they were not mistaken.
The sky had darkened considerably in the South.
The air became thick and heavy, and the mosquitoes became extremely annoying, almost unbearable.
When she found herself in a marshy meadow, overgrown with black alder festooned with naked green catkins, she felt a presence.
She heard nothing but she felt there was someone.
She knew there were elves.
She stopped her horse, so the archers hidden in the thicket had the opportunity to take a good look at her.
She held her breath, hoping she would not startle them.
A horsefly buzzed over the deer carcass, which rested over the haunches of her mount.
Rustling.
A quiet whistle.
A whistle in response.
The Scoia'tael emerged from the bushes like ghosts, and only then Milva breathed more freely.
She knew them.
They belonged to the commando of, Coinneach Dá Reo.
"Hael." she said, dismounting.
"Que'ss va?" "Ne'ss," said elf curtly, whose name she could not remember.
"Caemm." The others were camped not far, in a clearing.
There were at least thirty, more than just the Coinneach commando.
Milva was surprised, the numbers of Squirrel detachments had started to decrease.
The commando groups she had seen lately were bloodstained, ragged and sickly, barely holding on in the saddles of their weak horses.
This commando was different.
"Cead, Coinneach." greeted the approaching leader.
"Ceadmil, sor'ca." Sor'ca.
Little sister.
She gave this name to those with whom she regarded as friends, to express her respect and sympathy, although they were older than herself.
At first, she was known as Dh'oine to the elves, human being.
Later, as she helped them regularly, they began to call her Woedbeanna Aen, "woman of the woods".
Later still, when they began to know her better, they called her as the dryads did.
Milva, meaning Kite.
Her real name, which she revealed only to her closest friends on the condition that they returned the gesture, did not sound right in the elven tongue.
They pronounced it Mear'ya, with a slight grimace, as if it was akin to something unpleasant in their language and they would immediately decide to call her "sor'ca" instead.
"Where are you heading?" Milva looked around slowly, but still did not see any wounded or sick.
"The Eighth Mile? To Brokilon?" "No." She refrained from asking further questions, she knew better.
She was content to just watch their faces, immobile, concentrated, noting the ostensible calm, exaggerated, as they organised their equipment and weapons.
It was enough to look into their deep, bottomless eyes to understand.
She knew that they were peparing for battle.
From the south, black clouds gathered.
The sky grew dark.
"And where are you going, sor'ca?" Coinneach asked, casting a quick glance at the deer laid over her horse, he smiled slightly.
"South," she replied coolly, to avoid any mistunderstanding.
"By Drieschot." The elf's smile disappeared.
"On human shores?" "At least until the Ceann Treis." she said with a shrug, "I will skip the route past the Brokilon waterfalls, because ..." She turned her head when she heard a horse snort.
New Scoia'tael had come to join the already large commando.
These Milva knew better.
"Ciaran!" She exclaimed, without hiding her astonishment.
"Toruviel! What are you doing here? I've just taken you to Brokilon and you're back ..." "Ess'creasa, sor'ca." Ciaran aep Dearbh interrupted gravely.
The bandage around the head of the elf was stained with blood.
"Yes," Toruviel repeated after him, dismounting carefully so as not to disturb her arm bent in a sling.
"We heard news.
We could not remain stuck in Brokilon when each arrow counts." "If I had known," Milva muttered with a pout, "I would not have made all that trouble for you.
I would not have risked my neck at the crossing." "The news came last night." Toruviel quietly explained.
"We could not ...
We can not abandon our comrades at a time like this.
It is impossible, you understand, sor'ca." The sky darkened more and more.
This time, Milva clearly heard the thunder rumbling in the distance.
"Do not go South, sor'ca." Coinneach Dá Reo said.
"A storm is brewing." "And what can a storm do ..." She paused, looking at him closely.
"Ha! So it's that kind of news? Nilfgaard, yes? Soldiers of the Empire march across Sodden to the Jaruga? They will strike at Brugge? Is that why you are going?" He did not answer.
"Yes, just like Dol Angra." She looked into his dark eyes.
"The Emperor of Nilfgaard will use you, just as before.
Your people protect their rear so they can slaughter humans by sword and fire.
And after, once the Emperor has made peace with the kings, they will crush you.
You will perish in your own flame." "Fire purifies.
And it hardens.
We must go through it.
Aenyel Fhael, ell'ea, sor'ca? Or as you say: the baptism of fire." "I prefer another kind of fire." Milva took the deer from her horse and dropped it on the ground at the feet of the elves.
"The one that crackles under a spit.
Here, for you will need the energy on the road.
I no longer need it." "Will you go to the South?" "Yes." I'm going, she thought, I'm going fast.
I must warn this idiot witcher, I must warn him of the turmoil he will be caught up in.
I have to change his mind.
"Do not go, sor'ca." "Leave me be, Coinneach." "A storm is brewing in the South." The elf repeated.
"A great storm.
And a great fire.
Take shelter in Brokilon, sister, do not ride south.
You've done enough for us, you can do nothing more.
You do not have to go.
We must.
Ess'-Tedd, esse crease! It is time for us to leave.
Farewell." The air was heavy and dense.
*** The spell of teleprojection was tricky, the sorcerers were to speak with one voice, by joining hands and thoughts.
Even then, it turned out to be a devilishly strenuous exercise, partly because the distance was so considerable.
The clenched eyelids of Philippa Eilhart quivered, Triss Merigold panted, and sweat beads ran down the high forehead of Keira Metz.
Only the face of Margarita Laux-Antille expressed no fatigue.
The small room plunged into semi-lit darkness, suddenly, a mosaic of light began to dance along the dark wood paneling.
Outlined by a white glow, an orb appeared above the round table.
While Philippa Eilhart chanted the last incantations, the orb came up right in front of her, on top of one of the twelve chairs placed around the table.
An indistinct silhouette took shape inside it.
The projection was not very stable, the image flickered, but it soon became clearer.
"Holy shit," Keira muttered, wiping her forehead.
"Do they not know of glamarye or any other beauty spells in Nilfgaard?" "Apparently not." said Triss from the corner of her mouth.
"They certainly have not heard of fashion either." "Neither have they heard of make-up." said Philippa quietly.
"But don't say a word now, girls.
And do not gape at her.
We must stabilize the projection and greet our guest.
Strengthen me, Rita." Margarita Laux-Antille repeated the formula of the incantation and gestured to Philippa.
The image flickered several times, it started to lose its vague picture and unnatural glow, the contours and colours became more acute.
The sorceresses were now carefully observing the silhouette that was facing them.
Triss bit her lip and glanced at Keira.
The woman within the projection was pale and her complexion was ugly.
She had bland, expressionless eyes, narrow bluish lips and a slightly hooked nose.
She wore a bizarre, conical, rather crumpled hat.
Thin, dark, greasy hair hung from underneath it.
Her robes were loose and shapeless, black with a silver trim, and frayed at the shoulder making her look unattractive and neglected.
They were embroidered with a circle and a crescent star which served as the only decoration worn by the Nilfgaardian sorceress.
Philippa Eilhart rose, trying not to unduly expose her jewels, her laces and her cleavage.
"The venerable Lady Assire," she said.
"Welcome to Montecalvo.
We are delighted that you have accepted our invitation." "I accepted out of curiosity." said the Nilfgaardian sorceress with an unexpectedly pleasant and melodious voice, instinctively adjusting her hat.
Her hands were thin, marked with yellow spots, and her nails were broken and uneven, obviously bitten.
"Only out of curiosity," she reiterated, "however the consequences could indeed prove to be disasterous for me.
I beg you to give me an explanation." "I will do so in a moment," Philippa nodded, motioning the other sorceresses.
"But before then, allow me to call the projections of the other participants of the meeting and make a cross-presentation.
I ask a little patience." The sorceresses united hands again and resumed their incantations.
The air in the chamber rang like taut wire from the ceiling coffers and once again descended in a glowing haze, filling the room with flickering shadows.
Above three of the unoccupied chairs, spheres of pulsating light began to form, the outlines of the silhouettes within becoming visible.
The first to appear was Sabrina Glevissig, wearing a provocatively low-cut turquoise dress with a large, standing lace collar, which formed a beautiful setting for her curly hair crowned with a brilliant diadem.
Next to her, emerging from the misty light projection, was Sheala de Tancarville in a black velvet gown trimmed with pearls, her neck wrapped with a silver fox boa.
The Nilfgaardian sorceress nervously licked her thin lips.
Just wait for Francesca, thought Triss.
When you see Francesca, little black rat, your eyes will pop out of your head.
Francesca Findabair did not disappoint.
Her dress was the colour of blood, revealing her appetizing form.
She wore a necklace of rubies, an ambitious hairdo, and her doe eyes were encircled with keen elven makeup.
"Ladies, I wish you all welcome to Montecalvo," said Philippa.
"I took the liberty of inviting you here to address some issues of significant importance.
I regret that we meet as teleprojections, however, due to the times and the distances between us, a real meeting would have been impossible.
I, Philippa Eilhart, the mistress of this castle, as hostess and instigator of this meeting will handle the introductions.
To my right, Margarita Laux-Antille, the head of the Academy of Aretuza.
To my left, Triss Merigold, of Maribor, and Keira Metz, of Carreras.
Next, we have Sabrina Glevissig, of Ard Carraigh and Sheala Tancarville of Creyden, representing Kovir.
Then Francesca Findabair, known as Enid an Gleanna, the current ruler of the Valley of Flowers.
And finally Assire var Anahid of Vicovaro, from the Empire of Nilfgaard.
And now ..." "And now I will say goodbye!" Sabrina Glevissig yelled, pointing at Francesca with her hand covered in rings.
"You went too far, Philippa! I'm not going to sit at the same table as the damn elf, even as an illusion! She failed to clean the blood from the walls and floors of Garstang.
The blood she and Vilgefortz spilled!" "I beg you to observe the proprieties and keep your cool." Philippa leaned on the edge of the table with both hands.
"Listen to what I have to say.
I do not ask anything more.
When I finish, each of you will decide whether to stay or leave.
The projection is voluntary, it can be interrupted at any time.
The only thing I ask of those who decide to leave, is to keep the secrecy of this meeting." "I knew it!" Sabrina moved so suddenly that for a moment she came out of the projection.
"A secret meeting! Secret arrangements! In short, a conspiracy! And the intent is clear.
Do you mock us, Philippa? First you demand that we keep this from our kings and our colleagues, which you have not seen fit to invite.
And there sits Enid Findabair, by the grace of Emhyr var Emreis the reigning ruler of the elves of Dol Blathanna, who actively supports and arms Nilfgaard.
That's not to say I'm not more amazed at the projection of a Nilfgaardian sorceress here in this room.
Since when did the sorcerers of Nilfgaard cease to profess blind obedience and docile servility towards the Imperial power? And what secrets are we talking about here? If she's here, its at the knowledge and consent of Emhyr! At his command! She is the eyes and ears of the Emperor!" "I doubt it." said Assire var Anahid calmly.
"Nobody knows that I participate in this meeting.
I was asked in secrecy, which I have preserved and will maintain.
It is also in my own interest to do so - if my participation came to light, I'd lose my head.
For that is why there is such servility among sorcerers in the Empire, they have a choice between slavery and the scaffold.
I have undertaken a risk by accepting your invitation.
I did not come here as a spy and I have only one way to prove it, my own death.
Just break Lady Eilharts request of secrecy.
If the news of our meeting leaves these walls, I lose my life." "For me, the betrayal of this secret could also have unpleasant consequences," Francesca smiled charmingly.
"You would have a marvelous opportunity for revenge, Sabrina." "I will get revenge in some other way, elf." Sabrina's black eyes flashed ominously.
"If the secret comes to light, it will not be through my fault or carelessness.
Not mine!" "Are you implying something?" "Of course," Philippa Eilhart interjected.
"Of course, Sabrina gently reminds us of my work with Sigismund Dijkstra.
As if she herself had never maintained any contact with the agents of King Henselt." "There is a difference," Sabrina growled.
"I was not Henselt's mistress for three years, let alone his spies!" "Enough of this! Shut up!" "I agree." Sheala de Tancarville suddenly said outloud.
"You've said enough, Sabrina.
Enough already about Thanedd, enough about espionage and personal affairs.
I do not come here to take part in such discussions or to listen to you spread your resentment and bombard us with insults.
I'm not interested in the role of mediator, and if you invited me here with this intention, I will say it was to no avail.
Indeed, I already suspect that I participate in vain, and I unnecessarily lose precious time at the great expense of my research work.
However, I will refrain from making assumptions.
Finally, I propose we call on Philippa Eilhart to begin, so we can finally learn the reason for this gathering.
We will learn the role in which we play here.
Then, without unnecessary emotions we will decide whether we should continue the show or lower the curtain.
The discretion of which we are asked to commit, of course, obliges us all.
And I, Sheala de Tancarville, will personally take appropriate action against the indiscreet." None of the sorceresses moved nor uttered a word.
Triss did not for a moment doubt Sheala's warning.
The Kovir recluse did not make threats she threw to the wind.
"We give you the stage, Philippa.
I ask that the venerable congregation remain silent until you are finished." Philippa Eilhart rose, rustling her dress.
"Dear sisters," she said.
"The situation is serious.
Magic is threatened.
The tragic events of Thanedd, thoughts that I remember with regret and reluctance, have shown that the effects of hundreds of years of seemingly conflict-free cooperation, can be forgotten in the blink of an eye, when excessive private interests and ambitions emerge.
Today we are in a breakdown, a disorder, and we run into mutual hostility and distrust.
This is what happens, when things begin to spiral out of control.
To regain control, to prevent a terrible disaster, we should take a strong hand to the helm of this ship carried away by the storm.
Lady Laux-Antille, Lady Metz, Lady Merigold and I have already discussed this matter and have reached an agreement.
Rebuilding the Chapter and Council destroyed at Thanedd is not enough.
Besides, no one is capable of rebuilding both of these institutions, and there is no guarantee that it will not be infected by the same disease that destroyed the previous one.
We propose a completely different, secret organization that will serve only the affairs of magic, which will do everything in its powers to prevent a disaster.
For if magic dies, this world will perish.
Just as centuries ago, a world devoid of magic and the progress it brings will plunge into chaos and darkness, it will be drowned in blood and barbarity.
All ladies present here are welcome to join our initiative, to actively participate in the proposed secret group.
We have invited you here to hear your views on on this matter.
I am done." "Thank you." Nodded Sheala de Tancarville.
"If the ladies will allow me, I will begin.
My first question, Philippa; why me? Why was I invited? Repeatedly, I rejected my candidacy for the Chapter, and I refused a chair on the Council.
Firstly, my work consumes me.
Secondly, I thought then and still think that there are, in Kovir, Hengfors and Poviss others, more deserving of these honors.
I ask, why I was invited here and not Carduin? Not Istredd of Aedd Gynvael, Tugdual or Zangenis?" "Because they are men." said Philippa.
"The organization, which I have mentioned should be composed exclusively of women.
And you Assire?" "I withdraw my question." The Nilfgaardian sorceress smiled.
"It was the same as Lady de Tancarville's.
The answer satisfied me." "This smacks of feminist chauvinism." sneered Sabrina Glevissig.
"Especially from your mouth, Philippa, after your change of ...
sexual orientation.
I have nothing against men.
In fact, I love men, and life without them I can not imagine.
But ...
After a moment's thought ...
I believe this to be a wise concept.
Men are mentally unstable, too sensitive to their emotions and you can not count on them in times of crisis." "It is true." admitted Margarita Laux-Antille calmly.
"We constantly compare the results of the of the Aretuza adepts to those boys from the school in Ban Ard and the comparison falls invariably in favour of the girls.
Magic requires patience, delicacy, intelligence, common sense and tenacity.
It needs one to bear calmly and humbly their setbacks and failures.
Men lose to ambition.
They always want what they know is impossible and unattainable, and they do not notice what is possible." "Enough, enough, enough." Sheala pouted, though not hiding her smile.
"There is nothing worse than scientifically manufactured chauvinism, shame on you, Rita! Although ...
I agree also with the unisex structure of the proposed convention...
or, if prefered, Lodge.
As we understand this is for the future of magic, and magic is too serious a matter to entrust its fate to men." "If I may," Francesca Findabair said in her melodious voice, "I would like us to stop the rambling speculation about the nature of the domination of our gender, this harbours no discussion.
Let us instead focus on matters relating to the proposed initiative, the purpose of which is still not entirely clear to me.
The timing is not accidental, and is clearly related to the war.
Nilfgaard has invaded and forced the Northern Kingdoms to the wall.
So behind the vague slogans that I have heard, is hidden understandably, the desire to reverse the situation and defeat Nilfgaard? And then to skin the audacious elves? If so, Philippa, we do not find common ground." "Is this the reason why I have been invited here?" Asked Assire var Anahid.
"I do not devote much attention to politics, but I know that the Imperial army has the advantage over your troops.
Aside from Lady Francesca and Madame de Tancarville coming from a neutral kingdom, all the ladies represent kingdoms which are hostile to the Nilfgaardian Empire.
Do you expect me to see this magic word of solidarity, as an incentive for treason? I'm sorry, but I do not see myself in that role." Having finished her speech, Assire leant, as if to lay her hand on something that was not in the projection.
Triss thought she heard meowing.
"She has a cat!" whispered Keira Metz.
"I bet he's black ..." "Not so loud." Philippa hissed.
"Dear Francesca, dear Assire.
Our initiative should be absolutely apolitical, that is its basic premise.
We will not be guided by the interests of races, kingdoms, kings and emperors, but the good magic and its future." "Driven by the good magic," Sabrina Glevissig smiled mockingly, "but still forgetting to ensure the welfare of witches? And yet we know how our fellow sorcerers are treated in Nilfgaard.
We talk of being apolitical, but when Nilfgaard wins and we find ourselves under Imperial power, we will all look like ..." Triss moved uneasily, Philippa let out a barely audible sigh.
Keira looked down, Sheala pretended to adjust her boa.
Francesca bit her lip.
Assire var Anahid's face did not flinch, but was covered with a slight blush.
"I just wanted to say...
It's a sad fate that awaits us all." Sabrina finished quickly.
"Philippa, Triss and I, all three of us were at Sodden Hill.
Emhyr will make us pay, as we will pay forThanedd, and for the entirety of our involvement.
But this is just one of the reservations that stops me from agreeing to the declared political neutrality of the convention.
Does participation in it mean the immediate resignation of the active and political, after all, service that we act in now with our kings? Or will we remain in this service and serve two masters at once: magic and power?" "When someone tells me that he is apolitical,"Francesca smiled, "I always ask which of the policies he is referring to." "And you know for certain he does not mean the one that he follows." said Assire var Anahid, looking at Philippa.
"I am apolitical," Margarita Laux-Antille raised her head.
"And my school is apolitical.
I mean all political types that exist!" "Dear ladies," Sheala spoke.
She had remained silent for a long time.
"Remember that you are the superior sex.
So do not behave like girls who are fighting over bowl of sweet treats on the table.
The principal proposed by Philippa is clear.
At least to me, and I still don't have enough reason to consider you to be less keen of mind than I am.
Outside of this room, be who you want, and serve whom you want and for whatever reason you choose to, as faithfully as you wish.
But when the convention is gathered, we will deal exclusively with magic and its future." "This is exactly how I imagine it." Philippa Eilhart confirmed.
"I know that there are many problems, as well as doubts and ambiguities.
We will discuss them at the next meeting in which all will take part, not as a projection or illusion, but in their own person.
Your presence will be regarded not as a formal act of accession to the convention, but as a goodwill gesture.
We will decide together whether such a convention should be created.
All of us.
Fairly." "All of us?" Sheala repeated.
"I see empty chairs, I assume they are not there by chance?" "The agreement should have twelve sorceresses.
I would like Lady Assire to propose a candidate who should be present at our next meeting.
Surely the Empire of Nilfgaard has another worthy sorceress.
The second place I leave to you to cast, Francesca, because as the only pure-blood elf you should not feel isolated.
The third ..." Enid an Gleanna raised her head.
"Please, I ask that you give me two places.
I have two candidates." "Are any of the Ladies opposed to this request? No? Neither do I object.
Today is the fifth day of August, the fifth day after the new moon.
We will meet again on the second day after the full moon, dear sisters, in fourteen days." "One moment," interrupted Sheala de Tancarville.
"One seat remains empty.
Who will be the twelfth sorceress?" "This will be the first problem that will face the Lodge." Philippa smiled mysteriously.
"In two weeks I will tell you who should sit on the twelfth chair.
And then together we will work out how to bring that person here.
The identity of this candidate may surprise you.
For this is no ordinary person, my dear sisters.
It is Life or Death, Destruction or Rebirth, Order or Chaos.
It depends on how you look at it." The entire village came out en masse to the fence to watch the passage of the gang.
Tuzik went along with the others.
He had work to do, but he could not resist.
Recently, there had been much news of the rats.
Even a rumor circulated that they had all been captured and hanged, but the rumor was false, as the evidence demonstrated.
There they paraded right now, ostensibly, unhurried, before the whole village.
"Insolent rogues." Someone whispered in awe behind Tuzika.
"They strut right through the village ..." "Dressed as if for a wedding ..." "And what horses! You will see no horses like that in Nilfgaard!" "Bah, they were stolen! The Rats steal everyones horses.
Today it is easy to sell a nag anywhere.
But they keep the best for themse ..." "This one at the front, look at him, he's Giselher ...
Sort of their leader." "And the one on the chestnut next to him is an elf...
Spark's her name ..." A mongrel emerged from behind the fence and began to bark, he bounced around the front hooves of Spark's mare.
The elf shook her lush mane of dark hair, turned her horse, leaned heavily and lashed the dog with her whip.
The mut yelped in pain and turned three times on the spot.
Spark spat at him.
Tuzik muttered a curse between his teeth.
The villagers around him whispered continuously, discreetly pointing to the next Rat riding through the village.
Tuzik listened, he couldn't help it.
He knew the gossip and hearsay no worse than others.
He easily guessed that the one with the straw-colored hair down to his shoulders, biting an apple, was Kayleigh, the one with the broad-shoulders was Asse, and the one in the embroidered sheepskin was Reef.
Two girls followed at the end of the parade, riding side by side holding hands.
The tallest one, sitting on a bay horse, had a shaved head like a typhus victim, her unbuttoned jacket revealed her pristine white lace blouse, her necklace, bracelets and earrings threw dazzling reflections.
"The shaved one is Mistle..." Tuzik heard.
"She's hung with baubles like a Christmas tree at Yule." "They say that she has slaughtered more people than she has seen springs..." "And the other? The one with a sword on her back?" "Falka's her name.
She's ridden with The Rats since the summer.
She's the newcomer ..." The newcomer, assessed Tuzik, was not much older than his daughter, Milenka.
The ash-blond hair of the young rogue fell in wisps from under her red velvet beret, topped with a bouquet of pheasant feathers that protruded arrogantly.
Around her neck she wore a silk scarf of burning poppy colour, tied in a fancy bow.
Among the villagers who had come out of their cottages, commotion suddenly errupted.
Giselher, had stopped his horse, and condescendingly tossed a tinkling pouch of coins at the foot of Grandmother Mykitka, who was leaning on her cane.
"May the gods keep you, my little darling!" Grandmother Mykitka wailed.
"May you be healthy, our guardians, that ..." The noise of Sparks laughter drowned out the old woman's voice.
The elf rakishly supporting her right foot in the stirrup, reached for a bag and poured a handful of coins headlong into the crowd.
Asse and Reef followed her example.
A shower of silver fell onto the sandy road.
Kayleigh, chortling, launched his half-eaten apple into the swirling crowd.
"Benefactors!" "Little hawks!" "May fate be kind to you!" Tuzik did not run like the others, he would not fall on his knees to dig coins out of the sand and chicken shit.
He stood still by the fence, looking at the two girls passing slowly.
The younger girl, with the ashen hair, caught his eye and saw his facial expression.
She let go of the hand of the girl with the shaven head, urged her horse and rushed at him, driving him against the fence and almost touching him with her stirrup.
He saw her green eyes and shuddered.
They were cold, full of evil and hatred.
"Leave him Falka," called the shaven headed girl.
"It is pointless." The green-eyed bandit was content to take one last look at Tuzik, then followed the Rats without even turning her head.
"Guardians!" "Little hawks!" Tuzik spat.
By mid afternoon, the Blacks, the menacing cavalry from the fort at Fen Aspra descended upon the village.
Their horseshoes rumbled, the horses whinnied, rattling their weapons.
The mayor and the other villagers questioned, lied like madmen, and directed the soldiers in the pursuit of a false trail.
Fortunately, no one questioned Tuzik.
When he returned home from the pasture and went to the garden, he heard voices.
He recognized the chattering of the twins Stelmach and Zgarba, the broken falsetto of the neighbours children.
Then he heard the voice of Milenka.
They must be playing, he thought.
He came out from behind the woodshed.
He froze.
"Milenka!" Milenka, his only living daughter, the apple of his eye, hung a stick round her back by a string, posing as a sword.
She had let her hair free, clinging to her woolly hat with a rooster feather sticking out, round her neck her mother's scarf...
In a bizarre, fanciful bow.
Her eyes were green.
Tuzik had never beaten his daughter, he had never used the father's strap.
It was the first time.
*** On the horizon there was a flash of lightening, and a thunderous roar errupted.
A gust of wind harrowed the surface of the Ribbon.
There will be a storm, thought, Milva, and rain comes after a storm.
The finches were not wrong.
She spurred her horse on.
If she wanted to catch up with the witcher before the storm, she had to hurry.
"I have known many soldiers in my life.
Marshals, generals and voivods, winners of many campaigns and many battles.
I listened to their stories and memories.
I saw them, looking at their maps, drawing lines of different colors, making plans, developing strategies.
In this war on paper, everything worked, everything was clear and took place in an ordered fashion.
"It must be so," explained the military.
"The army is all about order and discipline.
The army can not exist without these two pillars." It is all the more surprising then, that real war - and I have known more than one! - In terms of order and discipline, is not dissimilar to a brothel engulfed in fire.
Dandelion Half a century of poetry 

