Chapter Six 

'I asked you,' Ciri growled angrily, lying on her back, 'not to touch me.' Mistle withdrew her hand which was tickling the back of Ciri's neck, stretched out beside her, folded her hands under her shaved head and stared at the sky.
'You have been acting strange lately, Hawk.' 'I just don't want to be touched, that's all.' 'It was just a game.' 'I know,' Ciri pursed her lips, 'it's just a game.
All this was to you was a game.
But I no longer enjoy this game.
Just stop it!' Mistle lay on her back again and was silent a long time, staring at the white clouds slowly stretching their way through the sky.
High above the forest a hawk circled.
'Your dreams,' she said finally, 'it is because of your dreams, right? Almost every night you wake up screaming.
What you experienced is coming back to you in your dreams.
I know it.' Ciri did not answer.
'You have never told me about yourself,' Mistle again broke the silence.
'About what happened to you.
Neither have you told me where you came from.
Or even if you have loved ones...' Ciri quickly moved her hand to her neck, but this time it was only a ladybug.
'I had a family,' she said dully, without looking at her companion.
'That is, I thought I had one... Those who would find me, even here, at the end of the world if they wanted... Or if they lived.
Oh what are you doing, Mistle? Do I have to tell you about myself?' 'You don't have to.' 'That's good.
Because it is probably just a game to you.
Like everything else between us.' 'I don't understand,' Mistle turned her head, 'why you don't leave, if things with me are so bad.' 'I don't want to be alone.' 'Is that all?' 'That's a lot.' Mistle bit her lip.
But before she could say anything, they heard a whistle.
Both of them jumped up, shook the needles from their clothes and ran to the horses.
'Let the fun begin.' Mistle said jumping into the saddle and drawing her sword.
'For some time now you have enjoyed this more than the others, Falka.
Don't think that I haven't noticed.' Ciri angrily struck the horse with her heels.
They galloped down the slope of the ravine in fits and starts, listening to the wild shouts of the rest of the Rats, coming out of the woods from the other side of the road.
The jaws of the trap closed.
*** The private audience was over.
Vattier de Rideaux, Viscount of Eiddon, head of military intelligence for Emhyr var Emreis, left the library, bowing to the Queen of the Valley of Flowers in a way that was shorter than protocol required.
The bow was at the same time, extremely cautious and measured – the imperial spy did not take his eyes off of the two ocelots who were laying at the feet of the lady of the elves.
The cats blue eyes seemed sluggish and sleepy, but Vattier knew they were not pets, but vigilant guardians, ready to turn quickly into a bloody pulp anyone who dared approach the Queen at a distance that was not allowed under protocol.
Francesca Findabair called Enid an Gleanna, Daisy of the Valley, waited until the door closed behind Vattier and stroked her cats.
'Already, Ida.' she said.
Ida Emean aep Sivney, the elven sorceress, a free Aen Seidhe from the Blue Mountains, hidden during the audience by a spell of invisibility, appeared in the corner of the room, adjusting her mahogany hair.
The ocelots responded by only slightly opening their eyes a little wider.
Like all cats, they could see the invisible, their senses could not be easily fooled by magic.
'The parade of spies is starting to annoy me.' Francesca said with a sneer, moving to a more comfortable position in her ebony chair.
'Henselt of Kaedwen recently sent me a "consul", Dijkstra came to Dol Blathanna on a "trade mission".
And now Vattier de Rideaux head of imperial intelligence himself! Oh, and previously Stefan Skellen prowled around here, the Grand Imperial Nobody.
But I did not grant him a hearing.
I am the Queen and Skellen is nothing.
Although he has a position, he is nobody.
'Stefan Skellen,' Ida Emean said slowly, 'was also here to see us, where he had more luck.
He spoke with Filavandrel and Vanadain.' 'And just like Vattier to me, he asked about Vilgefortz, Yennefer, Rience and Cahir Mawr Dyffryn aep Ceallach?' 'Among other things.
You would be amazed, but what interested him was the original version of the prophecy of Ithlinne Aegli aep Aevenien, especially the passages that speak of Aen Hen Ichaer, The Elder Blood.
He was also interested in Tor Lara, the Tower of Gulls, and the legendary portal that once connected the Tower of Gulls to Tor Zireael, the Swallow's Tower.
How typical it is for humans, Enid.
To expect that we would immediately, on command, explain the mysteries and secrets that we ourselves have tried to unravel for centuries.' Francesca raised her hand and examined her rings.
'Interesting,' she said, 'and Philippa knows about the strange hobbies of Vattier and Skellen? And Emhyr var Emreis, whom they both serve.' 'It would be prudent to assume that she does not know.' Ida Emean looked keenly at the Queen.
'And to hide it at the meeting in Montecalvo of what we know, both to Philippa and the entire Lodge.
It would not throw a good light on us...
We want the Lodge to work.
We want them to trust us, the elven mages, not suspected us of double play.' 'The thing is, we are conducting a double play, Ida.
And we are playing with fire.
With the White Flame of Nilfgaard...' 'The fire burns,' Ida Emean looked the Queen in the eyes, 'but it also purifies.
We must go through it, Enid.
This Lodge must exist, must begin to act.
With all of its members.
Twelve sorceresses and among them one spoken of in prophecy.
Even if it is a game, let's put our trust in it.' 'And if this is provocation?' 'You know better than I the people involved in this.' Enid an Gleanna reflected.
'Sile de Tansarville,' she said at last, 'is a secretive recluse, she has no political connections.
Triss Merigold and Keira Metz have them, but are now both in exile because king Foltest expelled all the sorceresses from Temeria.
Margarita Laux-Antille is only interested in her school and nothing else.
Of course, at this moment the last three are strongly influenced by Philippa and Philippa is a mystery.
Sabrina Glevissig has not surrendered her political influence, which is in Kaedwen, but will not betray the Lodge.
She draws power, which she gives to the Lodge.' 'And this Assire var Anahid? And this second Nilfgaardian, who will be announced at Montecalvo?' 'I know little about them,' Francesca smiled slightly, 'but as soon as I see them, I will know more.
As soon as I see, in what and how they are dressed.' Ida Emean's painted eyes narrowed, but she refrained from asking a question.
'The jade statuette, 'she said after a moment, 'the still uncertain and enigmatic figurine of jade that is mentioned in the Ithlinnespeath.
Perhaps it is time to let her speak.
And tell us what to expect.
Shall I assist you with decompression?' 'No, I'll do it myself.
You know how one reacts to decompression.
The less witnesses, the less painful a blow to her pride.' *** Francesca Findabair checked again to verify that the entire courtyard was tightly isolated from the rest of the palace by the protective field that hid her from view and drowned out the sounds.
She lit three black candles and set them in candlesticks fitted with concave mirror reflectors.
The candlesticks were placed in certain places in a circle mosaic on the floor containing the seven signs of Vicca, the elven zodiac and symbols representing Belleteyn, Lammas and Yule.
Within the zodiac circle mosaic was a second, smaller one, dotted with magical symbols surrounding a pentagram.
On the three symbols of the smaller circle, Francesca placed small iron tripods and carefully and cautiously mounted three crystals.
The cut crystals fitted exactly into the mold atop the tripods, so the arrangement had to be precise, but still Francesca checked everything several times.
She preferred not to risk failure.
Nearby hissed a fountain, water gushing from the marble jar held by a marble naiad in four streams falling into the pool, setting into motion the leaves of water-lilies, between which goldfish swam.
Francesca opened the casket, took out a small, jade, soapy to the touch figurine and set it up exactly in the middle of the pentagram.
She backed away, looked again at the grimoire lying on the table, took a deep breath, raised her hands and incanted a spell.
The candles blazed brighter, sparkling light was thrown from the crystal facets.
The rays focus on the figurine, which immediately changed colour from green and became gold and after a few moments, transparent.
The air was charged with magical energy that beat against the protective barrier.
One of the candles threw sparks on the pavement; shadows danced on the floor the mosaic which began to come alive, to change shapes.
Francesca did not lower her hands and maintained the casting.
The figurine rapidly, pulsing and vibrant, changed its structure and shape, like a cloud of smoke.
The light emanating from the crystals through the smoke, revealed on the fringes of light, movement and hardening matter.
After another moment, in the center of the circle suddenly appeared a human figure.
A black-haired woman lying limp on the floor.
The candles went out in ribbons of smoke, the crystals went dark.
Francesca lowered her hands, stretched her fingers and wiped the sweat from her forehead.
The dark-haired woman curled up and started screaming.
'What is your name?' Francesca asked loudly.
The woman stretched and howled, clutching both of her arms over her lower abdomen.
'What is your name?' 'Ye... Yennef... Yennefer! Aaaaaaaah...' The elf sighed with relief.
The woman was still writhing, screaming, moaning and banging her fists on the pavement, trying not to vomit.
Francesca waited patiently.
With confidence.
The woman who had been only moments ago been a jade figurine was suffering.
It was to be expected.
But her brain was not damaged.
'Well, Yennefer,' Francesca said after a while, interrupting the groans.
'Enough is enough, right?' Yennefer, with evident effort, raised herself onto her hands and knees and wiped her face and eyes with her forearm, she looked around, lost.
Her gaze passed over Francesca as if the elf was not even in the yard; she stopped and came to life only at the sight of the water gushing from the fountain.
Yennefer crawled with great difficulty and climbed the edge of the fountain and with a slash, plunged into the pond.
She choked and started to splutter and cough, eventually she pushed her way through the water-lilies, reaching the base of the marble naiad and sat down, leaning her back against the statue.
The water came up to her breasts.
'Francesca...' she stammered, touching the obsidian star around her neck and looking somewhat more aware.
'You...' 'What do you remember?' 'Did you compress me...? Damn, did you compress me?' 'I compressed you and decompressed you.
What do you remember?' 'Garstang... Elves.
Ciri.
You.
And five hundred weights that suddenly dropped on my head... Now I know what it was.
Being compressed into an artifact...' 'Your memory is functioning.
That's good.' Yennefer lowered her head and watched the goldfish swimming around her legs.
'Make sure you change the pond water, Enid,' she murmured, 'I just urinated.' 'A trifle.' Francesca smiled.
'Take note, however, whether you can see blood in the water.
Sometimes compression destroys the kidneys.' 'Just the kidneys?' Yennefer took a cautious breath.
'I don't think there is a single healthy organ inside me... At least that's how I feel.
Hell, Enid, What did I do to deserve such treatment...' 'Get out of the water.' 'No, I am comfortable here.' 'I know.
Dehydration.' 'Degradation.
Deprivation.
Why did you do this?' 'Come out, Yennefer.' The sorceress stood up with difficulty, leaning both hands on the marble naiad.
She shook off the water-lilies with a sudden jerk and stood naked under the falling water.
Rinsing and having drunk, she came out of the pool and sat on the edge and began to wring her wet hair.
'Where am I?' 'In Dol Blathanna.' Yennefer wiped her nose.
'Is the fight in Thanedd still going on?' 'No.
It has finished.
A month and a half ago.' 'I must have given you great harm.' Yennefer said, 'I must have hurt you good, Enid.
But you can consider that our account has been levelled.
You have been properly avenged, although this was maybe a little too sadistic.
You were not content to cut my throat?' 'Do not talk nonsense.' The elf pursed her mouth.
'I compressed you to save your life at Garstang.
We will return to this later.
Please, take this towel.
Here is a sheet.
After a bath I will give you a new dress.
In the appropriate place, a tub of warm water.
You've hurt enough of the goldfish.' *** Francesca and Ida Emean drank wine.
Yennefer drank large amounts of carrot juice.
'Let me summarize,' she said, after hearing Francesca.
'Nilfgaard conquered Lyria, destroyed half of Aedirn and Kaedwen, and burned Vengerberg.
And right now they occupy Brugge and Sodden, while Verden surrendered without a fight.
Vilgefortz has disappeared without a trace.
Tissaia de Vries committed suicide.
You've become Queen of the Valley of the Flowers, The Emperor Emhyr rewarded you with the crown and sceptre in exchange for my Ciri, who he has sought for so long and now has to use as he sees fit.
I was compressed and packed in a box for a month and a half as a jade statue.
And you expect me to thank you for that.' 'That would be nice.' Francesca Findabair replied coldly.
'At Thanedd there was a certain Rience who had made it a point of honour to set himself the task of giving you a slow and cruel death and Vilgefortz promised to make it possible.
Rience travelled in search of you throughout Garstang.
But he couldn't find you, because you were already a jade figure hanging around my neck.' 'I was a figurine for forty-seven days.' 'Yes.
I, for my part, when asked, could answer truthfully that Yennefer of Vengerberg was not in Dol Blathanna.
Since they were asking about Yennefer of Vengerberg and not a figurine.' 'What has changed, that you finally decided to decompress me?' 'A lot.
I'll explain.' 'Before you do, I want to know something else.
Geralt was at Thanedd.
The witcher.
Remember I presented him to you in Aretuza.
What happened to him?' 'Calm down.
He lives.' 'I am calm.
Tell me, Enid.' 'Your witcher,' said Francesca, 'during only one hour did more than many do throughout their whole lives.
In short: He broke Dijkstra's leg, cut off the head of Artuad Terranova and brutal killed about ten Scoia'tael.
Oh, and not forgetting, awakening an unhealthy desire in Keira Metz.' 'Horrible,' Yennefer exaggeratedly wrinkled her brow.
'But Keira has since come to her senses, right? She does not hold a grudge, I hope.
The fact that, once having awakened her desires was undoubtedly caused by lack of time and not wilful neglect.
Reassure her about this on my behalf.' 'You will have the opportunity to do so,' said the Daisy of the Valley.
'And soon.
But back to the matters for which you are clumsily pretending indifference.
Your witcher who was so enthusiastic about the defence of Ciri, acted very foolishly.
He threw himself at Vilgefortz.
And Vilgefortz destroyed him.
That he did not kill him was probably due to a lack of time, not a lack of purpose.
So what? Are you still continuing to pretend that this doesn't concern you?' 'No.' Yennefer said with a grimace on her lips, ceasing to express derision.
'No, Enid.
It concerns me.
Soon a few people will know my shock.
I give you my word.' In the same way she had been affected by the teasing, Francesca was unmoved by the threats.
'Triss Merigold, teleported the half-dead witcher to Brokilon.' she said.
'For all I know, he is still healing with the dryads.
He seems to be doing well, but it would be best if he didn't stick his nose out of the forest.
Dijkstra's intelligence agents are hunting him.
They are hunting, you too.' 'And what have I done to deserve such an honour? For I did not break anything of Dijkstra... Oh, do not say anything, let me guess myself.
I disappeared from Thanedd without a trace.
No one imagined that I landed in your pocket, small and compressed.
Everyone is convinced that I escaped to Nilfgaard with my partner conspirators.
All except the actual conspirators, of course, but these are not going to correct the error.
The war continues, misinformation is a weapon whose blade must always be sharp.
And now, after forty-seven days, it is time to use that weapon.
My house in Vengerberg has been burned, I am persecuted.
There is nothing I can do, but join some Scoia'tael commandos.
Or otherwise join the fight for the freedom of the elves.' Yennefer took a sip of carrot juice and stared in the eyes of Ida Emean aep Sivney, who was staying quiet and calm.
'Well, Lady Ida? Lady Aen Seidhe of the free Blue Mountains? Is this what is written for me, my divine destiny? Why are you silent like a boulder?' 'I, Lady Yennefer,' replied the redheaded elf, 'I am silent when I have nothing meaningful to say.
It is always better than to spin unwarranted assumptions and mask anxiety with chatter.
Get to the point, Enid.
Explain to Lady Yennefer what is going on.' 'I'm all ears.' Yennefer touched the obsidian star on its velvet ribbon.
'Speak, Francesca.' The Daisy of the Valley placed her chin on her interlaced fingers.
'Today,' she said, 'is the second night, since the full moon.
In a short while we will teleport to castle Montecalvo, home of Philippa Eilhart.
We will take part in a meeting of an organisation, which should interest you.
After all, you were always of the opinion that magic is of the highest value, standing above all the divisions, conflicts, political choices, personal interests, resentments and animosity.
You will probably enjoy the news; we recently established a framework for such an institution, something like a secret lodge, set up solely to defend the interests of magic, having the task of ensuring that magic will occupy a place in the social hierarchy, where it belongs.
I allowed myself to be able to consider two new candidates for this structure, Ida Emean aep Sivney and you.' 'What an unexpected honour and promotion,' Yennefer sneered.
'From nonexistence, straight into the secret, elitist, magical lodge.
An institution standing above personal resentments and animosity.
But am I a suitable candidate? Will I find in myself the strength of character to get rid of the animosity I feel to the people who took my Ciri, or tortured a man who is not indifferent to me, and myself...' 'I'm sure,' interrupted the elf, 'that you will find in yourself the strength of character, Yennefer.
I know you and know you do not lack such a force.
You do not lack ambition, which should dispel doubts about the honour of the promotion.
If, however, this is what you want, I will tell you bluntly, I recommended you to the lodge because I think you are someone who deserves it and can serve to benefit the cause.' 'Thank you.' Yennefer said with a sardonic smile, 'Thank you Enid.
Truly, I feel the swell of ambition, pride and selfishness in me.
I'm going to explode at any moment.
And that is before I start to wonder why you recommended me for this lodge instead of another elf of Dol Blathanna or the Blue Mountains.' 'In Montecalvo,' Francesca replied coldly, 'you can find out why.' 'I'd rather not wait.' 'Tell her.' Ida Emean murmured.
'It's about Ciri,' Francesca said after a moment's thought, staring at Yennefer with impenetrable eyes.
'The Lodge is interested in her.
And nobody knows the girl as well as you.
The rest you will learn there.' 'All right.' Yennefer vigorously scratched her shoulder blade.
Her skin was dry from the compression and was still unbearably itchy.
'Who else is part of this Lodge? Apart from you and Philippa?' 'Margarita Laux-Antille, Triss Merigold and Keira Metz, Sile de Tansarville of Kovir, Sabrina Glevissig and two Nilfgaardian sorceresses.' 'Is this the international republic of females?' 'You could call it that.' 'They probably still consider me Vilgefortz accomplice.
Will they accept me?' 'They have accepted me.
The rest you will have to do yourself.
You will be asked to explain your relationship with Ciri.
From the beginning, from the events that your witcher was involved in fifteen years ago, when the story took place in Cintra, until the events of the last month and a half.
The Lodge will require your absolute honesty and truthfulness, to confirm your loyalty.' 'Who said anything about confirming? Isn't it a bit early to talk about loyalty? I don't even know the statutes and programs for this international ladies...' 'Yennefer.' The elf's slight eyebrows frowned.
'I recommended you to the Lodge.
But I have no intention of forcing anything – especially loyalty.
You have a choice.' 'I imagine not much of one.' 'Well, you can imagine.
But it is still a free choice.
For my part, however, I strongly urge you to choose the Lodge.
Believe me, this way you can help Ciri in a much more effective way than blindly throwing yourself into the maelstrom of events, which I believe, you have a great desire to do.
Ciri is at risk of death.
She can only be saved with our solidarity actions.
When you hear what is said in Montecalvo, you'll see that I'm telling the truth... Yennefer, I do not like the glow I see in your eyes.
Give me your word that you will not try to flee.' 'No.' Yennefer shook her head, covering her obsidian star with her hand.
'I can not do that, Francesca.' 'I would sincerely warn you, my dear, that all stationary target portals are blocked.
Whoever tries to teleport inside or out without Philippa's permission lands in a cell lined with dimeritium.
You can not open a portal yourself with the components.
I do not want to confiscate your star; you need to keep control of your mind.
But I warn you! If you try something... I can not allow... The Lodge could not allow you to run wild to save Ciri and seek revenge.
I still have your template and the spell algorithm.
I will reduce and compress you back into a jade figurine again.
If need be, for several months.
Or years.' 'Thanks for the warning.
But even with all that I still won't give my word.' *** Fringilla Vigo made a face, but she was nervous and tense.
She repeatedly scolded young Nilfgaardian wizards for succumbing to the uncritical stereotypical opinions and ideas, often refuted itself as trivial, painted by rumour and propaganda image of a typical Sorceress of the North – artificially beautiful, arrogant, vain and spoiled to the limits of perversion and often beyond these limits.
Now, however, the closer it came to teleporting to the castle of Montecalvo, the more uncertainty tugged at her, of what she might find at the reunion site of the mysterious Lodge.
And what awaited her there.
Her runaway imagination conjured beautiful images of women with diamond necklaces to their exposed breast with nipples painted with carmine, with moist lips and eyes shining with swallowed narcotics.
In her turbulent mind the secret deliberations of the Lodge meeting turned into a wild orgy with frantic music, aphrodisiacs and slaves of both sexes and elaborate accessories.
The last teleport had left her between two columns of black marble, with dryness in her mouth, the magic winds had left tears in her eyes and her hand clenched tightly her emerald necklace that plunged into her neckline.
Next to her Assire var Anahid also appeared to be noticeably nervous.
Fringilla, however, had reason to suspect that her friend was confused with her new dress, which was not very typical for her: a simple yet elegant blue colour, complimented by a tiny and modest necklace with alexandrite.
The nervousness passed at once.
The large and brightly lit, from magic lanterns, room was cold and quiet.
Nowhere could she see a naked black man beating a drum on the table or dancing girls clad only in jewellery nor smelt the odour of hashish or cantharides.
The Nilfgaardian sorceresses were immediately welcomed by the lady of the castle, Philippa Eilhart, attentive, friendly and polite.
Other sorceresses approached and introduced themselves and Fringilla breathed a sigh of relief.
The magicians from the north were beautiful, charming and sparkled with jewellery, but in their eyes, gently emphasized by makeup, there was no hint of either drugs or nymphomania.
None had exposed her breasts.
On the contrary, two of them had dresses up to their neck – austere, black-clad Sile de Tansarville and young Triss Merigold with beautiful blue eyes and auburn hair.
The brunette Sabrina Glevissig and the blond Margarita Laux-Antille and Keira Metz wore necklines down to their cleavage, but not much deeper than Fringilla's own.
Waiting for the other participants of the convent gave them time to talk, during which all had the opportunity to say something about themselves and with tactful statements and comments Philippa Eilhart quickly and deftly broke the ice, although the only ice in the area was piled on a mountain of oysters.
Other ice was not palpable.
Sile de Tansarville, a researcher, immediately found a lot of common topics with the researcher Assire var Anahid and Fringilla quickly gained a liking to the cheerful Triss Merigold.
The conversations were accompanied by the greed absorption of oysters.
Only Sabrina Glevissig refused, being a faithful daughter of Kaedwen's forests, she even expressed her contempt for the "slimy filth" and her desire for a piece of cold venison with prunes.
Philippa Eilhart, instead of responding to the insult with icy haughtiness, pulled a bell rope and soon inconspicuous and noiseless servants delivered meat.
Fringilla was astonished.
Well, she thought, different regions, different manners.
The portal between the columns began to brighten and vibrate.
Sabrina Glevissig face was covered in unbounded astonishment.
Keira Metz dropped the oyster knife onto the ice.
Triss Merigold gasped loudly.
Three sorceresses came through the portal.
Three elves.
One with hair of dark gold, a russet-haired one and one with raven black hair.
Welcome, Francesca,' Philippa said.
Her voice betrayed no emotions, but her eyes immediately narrow with caution.
'Welcome, Yennefer.' 'I had the privilege of filling two seats,' the melodiously golden-haired elf named Francesca said, clearly noting Philippa's astonishment.
'Here are my candidates.
You all know Yennefer of Vengerberg.
And Lady Ida Emean aep Sivney, Aen Saevherne of the Blue Mountains.' Ida Emean bowed her head with her red hair slightly, her flowing dress rustled.
'I suppose,' Francesca looked around, 'that we are complete.' 'We are missing only Vilgefortz.' Sabrina Glevissig said softly but with evident anger, while watching Yennefer with piercing eyes.
'And Scoia'tael hidden in the basement.' Keira Metz muttered.
Triss froze her with a glare.
Philippa made the introductions.
Fringilla stared curiously at Francesca Findabair, Enid an Gleanna, Daisy of the Valley, the famous Queen of Dol Blathanna, ruler of the elves who had recently regained their country.
The rumours of her breath-taking beauty, Fringilla thought, are not exaggerated.
Ida Emean, the red haired elf with deep eyes, was obviously genuinely interested in everything around her, including both Nilfgaardian sorceresses.
The free elves of the Blue Mountains did not maintain any relationships with not only humans, but even their own blood relatives living close to humans.
And the Aen Saevherne, the Knowing, were very few among the free elves, and were a closer to being legends.
Few people, even among the elves, could boast of a close contact with an Aen Saevherne.
Ida stood out among the group not only for her hair colour.
Among her jewellery was not an ounce of minerals, or a precious stone, she wore only pearls, coral and amber.
The source of the greatest excitement, however, was clearly the third sorceress, Yennefer, raven-haired, dressed in black and white, contrary to Fringilla's first impression, she was not an elf.
Her appearance in Montecalvo had been a tremendous surprise, and not pleasant for everyone.
Fringilla felt from some of the sorceresses an aura of antipathy and hostility.
When she was introduced to the Nilfgaardian sorceresses, Fringilla stopped on Yennefer's violet eyes.
Her eyes were tired and surrounded by dark circles and even makeup could not hide the fact.
'We know each other,' she said, touching an obsidian star at her throat.
The room suddenly fell into a silence full of anticipation.
'We have seen each other before,' Yennefer repeated.
'I do not remember.' Fringilla stared back.
'I am not surprised.
I, however, I have a good memory for faces and silhouettes.
I saw you on Sodden Hill.' 'And therefore there can be no mistake,' Fringilla Vigo proudly raised her head and ran her eyes over everyone.
'I was on the hill at Sodden.' Philippa Eilhart anticipated the response.
'I was also there,' she said, 'and I remember too, many things.
I do not think, however, that excessive and unnecessary straining of our memory will bring any benefit to us here in this room.
What we are going to undertake, would be server better by forgetting, forgiveness and reconciliation.
Do you agree with me, Yennefer?' The black-haired sorceress tossed a spiral curl from her forehead.
'When I finally find out what you intend to undertake here,' she said, 'I'll tell you, Philippa, what I agree with.
And what I don't.' 'In that case it would be best if we start without delay.
Please ladies take your seats.' Places at the round table – all except one – had been marked.
Fringilla sat beside Assire var Anahid, the right hand chair was free, separating her from Sile de Tansarville beside her was Sabrina Glevissig and Keira Metz.
To the left of Assire sat Ida Emean, Francesca Findabair and Yennefer.
And exactly opposite of Assire was Philippa Eilhart, who to her right sat Margarita Laux-Antille and to her left Triss Merigold.
All of the chairs had armrests carved in the shape of sphinxes.
Philippa started.
She repeated her welcome and immediately proceeded with things.
Fringilla was given a detailed briefing by Assire about the previous Lodge meeting and did not hear anything in the introduction that was new.
She was not surprised by either the statements made by all the sorceresses, nor the first topic of discussion.
But she was slightly embarrassed as the first concern voiced was the war with the Nilfgaardian Empire and especially the recently launched operations in Sodden and Brugge, during which the imperial army had clashed with the army of Temeria.
Despite the presumed apolitical character of the convent, some sorceresses could not hide their views.
Some were evidently troubled by Nilfgaard's presence on their doorstep.
Fringilla experienced mixed feelings.
She assumed that such enlightened people should understand that the Empire would bring to the North culture, welfare, order and political stability.
But on the other hand she did not know how she would react if her home was being approached by foreign armies.
Philippa Eilhart, however, must have been fed up with discussions on military matters.
'No one can predict the outcome of the war,' she said.
'What's more, this prediction would be devoid of meaning.
Let's analyse the latest events with a cool head.
First, I do not consider war to be the worst evil.
More pressing are the effects of overpopulation, which at this stage of the development of agriculture and industry would mean threat of total famine.
Secondly, war is the continuation of the politics of the rulers.
How many of those who rule now will live a hundred years? None, of course.
How many dynasties endure? There is no way to predict it.
Today's territorial disputes, dynastic conflicts, the ambitions and hopes of today will be in a hundred years from now, nothing but ashes and dust to the chronicles.
But if we are drawn into these wars, we will also end up as ashes and dust.
But if we look beyond the banners, if we close our ears to the cries of battle and patriotic feelings, we will survive.
And we need to survive.
We must, because we have a responsibility.
Not to the kings and their particular, narrow interests of one kingdom.
We are responsible for the world.
For progress.
For the changes that bring this progress.
We are responsible for the future.' 'Tissaia de Vries would have had it otherwise,' said Francesca Findabair.
'She was always been about the accountability to ordinary, simple people.
Not in the future, but here and now.' 'Tissaia de Vries is dead.
Had she lived she would be her among us.' 'Probably,' The Daisy of the Valley smiled.
'But I do not think she would agree with the theory of war as a remedy for famine and overpopulation.
Pay attention to the last word, dear colleagues.
These discussions we are undertaking in a common language to facilitate understanding.
But for me it is a foreign language.
And becoming more and more foreign.
In my language there is no word for "overpopulation", an Elvish word for this would be a neologism.
Tissaia de Vries, bless her memory, always cared about the fate of ordinary people.
As for me, it is no less important that the fate of an ordinary elf.
I'd agree with the idea of only dealing with the future and considering to as emphermal.
But I regret to say that today determines the tomorrow, and tomorrow will be without a future.
For you humans, it may be ridiculous to mourn for an elderberry bush that burned because of the winds of war, after all there is no short supply of elderberries, what does it matter, there will be another.
Forgive the botanical metaphor.
But please note that what is for you humans, a matter of politics, for us elves, is a matter of physical survival.' 'Politics do not interest me,' Margarita Laux-Antille, the rector of the academy of magic said loudly.
'I simply do not want the girls for whose education I have am in charge of, to be fed slogans about the love of country and used as war leaders.
The homeland of these girls is magic, that's what I teach.
If someone commits my girls to war, placing them on a new Sodden Hill, then they will lose, regardless of the outcome of the battle.
I understand your fears, Enid, be we have to address the future of magic, not radical problems.' 'We have to deal with the future of magic,' Sabrina Glevissig repeated.
'But the future of magic determines the status of the wizards.
Our status.
Our meaning.
The role that we play in society.
Trust, respect, credibility, the general belief in our usefulness, it that magic is essential.
Standing before us seems to be a simple alternative – either the loss of status and isolation in ivory towers, or service.
Service even on the hills of Sodden, even as war leaders...' 'Or as servants and messengers?' Triss Merigold said throwing back her beautiful hair.
'With bowed neck, ready to serve whenever the Emperor moves a finger? Because at the end of the day that is the role that Nilfgaard will give us, if they were to conquer us.' 'If you were to be conquered,' Philippa said with emphasis,' We would have no alternative.
We would have to serve.
But serve the magic.
Not kings or emperors, not their everyday politics.
Not the cause of integration of the races, because it is also subject to current political objectives.
Our convent, dear ladies, was not convened so that we will adapt to this policy or the daily changes on the front lines.
Not so that we frantically seek adequate solutions to the situation by changing the colour of our skins like chameleons.
The role of Lodge is to be active.
And opposed to what I have just spoke of.
And we must do it with every means at our disposal.' 'If I understand correctly,' Sile de Tansarville raised her head.
'You are encouraging us to actively influence the course of events? By all means? Even illegally?' 'What kind of laws are you talking about? About those for the weak and defenceless? About those that are written in codes and used by actual lawyers? Only one law binds us.
Ours!' 'I understand.' The Sorceress from Kovir smiled.
'So we are then to actively influence the course of events.
If we do not like the policy of the rulers, we simply change it.
Is this so, Philippa? Would it not be better, for that matter, to throw down those fools with crowns, dethrone them and drive them out? Can we take the power into our own hands?' 'More than once we have sat on the thrones of Rulers.
Our mistake was that we did not sit on a throne of magic.
We have never given absolute power to magic.
It is time we fix that error.' 'You, of course, mean yourself?' Sabrina Glevissig leaned over the table.
'Obviously on the throne of Redania? Her highness Philippa the First? With Dijkstra as prince consort?' 'I do not mean myself.
I do not mean the kingdom of Redania.
I mean the great kingdom of the North, which will arise from today's Kovir.
An Empire whose power is equal to Nilfgaard, thus swaying at this moment the scales of the world and bringing the finally into balance.
An Empire, ruled by magic, which we will take the throne by marrying the heir of Kovir with a sorceress.
Yes, you hear correctly, my dear colleges, you're looking in the right direction.
Yes, here at this table, there is an empty space where will sit a twelfth sorceress.
And then she will sit on the throne.' Sile de Tansarville broke the silence that had settled.
'It is certainly an ambitious project,' she said with a note of sarcasm in her voice.
'Certainly worthy of all who sit here.
It fully justifies the existence of this Lodge.
After all, it would constitute an affront to us all to be set a less noble task, even teetering on the verge of reality and feasibility.
It would be like driving a nail with an astrolabe.
No, no, it is better to start with a completely impossible task.' 'Why is it impossible?' 'Have mercy, Philippa,' said Sabrina Glevissig.
'None of the kings will ever marry a sorceress, no country will accept a sorceress on the throne.
It has been a custom for centuries.
It may not be a smart custom, but it still exists.' 'There are also,' added Margarita, 'technical barriers, I would say.
A person who could be put into Kovir's house would have to meet a number of conditions, both by us and by the royal family.
These conditions mutually exclude one another and vice versa.
Don't you realise Philippa? For us it would need to be a person educated in magic, totally committed to the cause of magic, understanding their role and able to play the part deftly, seamlessly and without suspicion.
Without help, without ever standing in shades of grey eminence, against whom the anger from the subjects must always be redirected at the first disturbance.
It must be both a person to whom Kovir itself, without any apparent pressure from our side, would choose to have as a wife and heir to the throne.' 'That is true.' 'And who do you think Kovir would choose without pressure? A girl of the royal family, with royal blood in her veins for generations.
A young girl, suitable for a young prince.
A girl who can give birth, because this is about a dynasty.
That sets the bar and excludes you, Philippa and excludes me, it even excludes Keira and Triss, the youngest among us.
It also excludes all adepts from my school, which, after all, are not very interesting because the buds of the petals are still of an unknown colour, it is unthinkable that any one of them could sit with us as at the empty place at this table as the twelfth.
In other words, even if the whole of Kovir goes mad and was willing to accept the king's marriage to a sorceress, a sorceress can not be found.
So who is to be this Queen of the North?' 'A girl of royal blood,' Philippa replied calmly.
'In whose veins runs the royal blood, the blood of several of the greatest dynasties.
Young and able to give birth.
A girl with unprecedented capabilities and divinatory magic, one who carries the Elder Blood.
A girl who can play with flying colours your role without conductors, directors or grey eminences, because it is her destiny.
A girl, whose abilities will be known only to us.
Cirilla, daughter of Pavetta of Cintra and granddaughter of the Lioness Calanthe.
Elder Blood, White Flame of the North, Destroyer and Rebuilder, whose coming was foretold hundreds of years ago.
Ciri of Cintra, the Queen of the North.
And from her blood will be born, the Queen of the World.' *** At the sight of the Rats dropping down in ambush, two of the riders escorting the carriage turned away and fled.
They did not stand a chance.
Giselher, Reef and Iskra cut off their retreat and after a short struggle unceremoniously slit their throats.
Kayleigh, Asse and Mistle fell on the remaining two, who were ready to desperately defend the carriage that was drawn by four horses.
Ciri felt an overwhelming disappointment and anger.
They had left her with none.
It looked like she was not going to get to kill.
But there was still one rider, a young man riding a fast horse who was at the front of the carriage.
He could have fled, but did not.
He turned and drew his sword and galloped straight at Ciri.
She stopped her little horse and allowed him to approach.
When her struck, rising in his stirrups, she hung from the saddle, nimbly avoiding his blade, she then straighten in her saddle again.
The young man was a fast and agile swordsman and struck again.
This time she deflected it sideways and feinted towards his face.
He instinctively tried to shield his face and her sword slipped over his blade and slashed up under his armpit in a way she had practiced for hours at Kaer Morhen.
The Nilfgaardian slipped from his saddle, fell to the floor, then rose to his knees, howling, trying wildly to stem the violent flow of blood pumping from his artery.
Ciri watched him for a moment, fascinated as always by the sight of a man who struggled with all his might against death.
She waited for him to bleed to death.
Then she left without looking back.
The ambush was over.
The escort were lying at their feet.
Reef and Asse had stopped the carriage, holding up a pair of men holding the reins.
The man, who was clinging to the right rein, a young man in coloured livery, fell to the ground, crying and begging for mercy.
The coachman threw down his reins and also begged for mercy, clasping his hands as if in prayer.
Giselher, Iskra and Mistle approached the carriage, Kayleigh jumped down from his horse and jerked open the door.
Ciri pulled her horse up closer and dismounted, still holding in her hand the sword covered in blood.
In the carriage sat a plump matron in robes and a cap, embracing a terribly pale young girl dressed in black, buttoned to the neck with a lace collar.
The dress Ciri noticed was fastened with a gem.
Very beautiful.
'Those are very pretty roans!' Iskra clapped her hands at the sight of the draft horses.
'As pretty as a picture! We will get a pile of Florens for those!' 'And the carriage.' Kayleigh showed his teeth to the woman and the girl.
'the groom and the coachman will pull it into town.
And when the road leads up hills the noble ladies will get out and help.' 'Gentleman robbers!' the matron groaned in terror, clearly more scared of Kayleigh's smile than the blood covered sword in Ciri's hand.
'I appeal to your honour! Do not defile this young girl!' 'Hey, Mistle,' Kayleigh shouted, laughing mockingly.
'They, from what I hear, they are appealing to your honour!' 'Shut your mouth,' Giselher grimaced, still in the saddle.
'No one is amused by your jokes.
And you, calm down woman.
We are the Rats.
We do not fight with women or damage them.
Reef, Spark, release the harness! Mistle, seize the horses! And be quick about it!' 'We are the Rats and we do not fight with women,' Kayleigh barred his teeth gain, staring at the pale face of the girl in the black dress.
'Sometimes we only amuse ourselves with them, if the desire.
And you miss? Do you not have an itch between the legs? Well, there is nothing to be ashamed of.
Just nod your head.' 'A little respect!' Cried the lady in the cap with a broken voice.
'How dare you talk like that to the baroness, outlaw?' Kayleigh laughed and exaggerated a bow.
'I ask forgiveness.
I did not mean to offend.
What, am I not allowed to even ask?' 'Kayleigh!' called Iskra.
'Come here! Why are you loitering? Help me release the harness! Falka! Move!' Ciri did not take her eyes off the coat of arms on the door of the carriage, a silver unicorn on a black background.
A unicorn, she thought.
I once saw such a unicorn...
When? In another life? Or maybe it was just a dream? 'Falka! What's wrong with you?' I am Falka.
But I was not always.
Not always.
She pursed her lips together.
I have been unpleasant to Mistle, she thought.
I have hurt her.
I have to apologize in some way.
She put her foot on the ladder of the carriage, looking at the gem on the dress of the pale girl.
'Give it.' She said dryly.
'How dare you?' choked the matron.
'Do you know who you are talking to? She is the noble-born Baroness of Casadei!' Ciri looked around and made sure no one could hear.
'Baroness?' she hissed.
'A low title.
And even if this baby was a countess she would have to bend down to me so far that her ass would be on the ground and her head lower.
Give me the brooch! What are you waiting for? Do I have to tear it from you, along with the corset?' *** The silence that ensued at the table following the speech by Philippa Eilhart was shortly replaced by a cacophony.
The sorceresses expressed surprise and disbelief, demanding explanations.
Some no doubt knew a lot about this foreseen ruler of the North, Cirilla or Ciri another name they were familiar with, but they knew less.
Fringilla Vigo knew nothing about the suspicions and speculations, and concentrated mainly on a certain lock of hair.
Assire, however, remained silent and commanded her with a look that she stay silent.
Philippa Eilhart took the floor again.
'Most of us saw Ciri on Thanedd, where she was in a trance and her predictions caused considerable commotion.
Some of us have even had close contact with her.
I speak mostly of you, Yennefer.
It is time you spoke.' When Yennefer told the audience about Ciri, Triss Merigold closely watched her friend.
Yennefer spoke calmly and without emotion, but Triss had known her for a long time and very well.
She had seen her in many situations, including those that had caused stress, tiredness and depression.
It was without a doubt that Yennefer was in this kind of situation.
She looked dejected, tired and sick.
The sorceress spoke, but Triss, who knew both the story and the person to which it referred, was devoted to quietly watching all those listening.
Especially the two witches from Nilfgaard.
Assire var Anahid, had changed much, looking very carefully but it was obvious she still felt insecure about her makeup and fashionable dress.
And Fringilla Vigo, the youngest, friendly, with a natural grace and simple elegance, with green eyes and hair as black as Yennefer's, but less abundant, shorter and combed smooth.
Both Nilfgaardians did not seemed lost among the intricacies of the history of Ciri, although Yennefer's story was long and rather confusing, beginning with the famous love affair in Cintra of Pavetta and the young man enchanted to be a hedgehog.
She spoke about the role of Geralt and the Law of Surprise and the binding of Ciri to the witcher.
Yennefer spoke about Geralt meeting Ciri in Brokilon, about the war, about her disappearance and discovery, of her training in Kaer Morhen.
About the Nilfgaardian agent, Rience and how he was chasing the girl.
About her study in the temple of Melitele and Ciri's mysterious abilities.
They listen with stone faces, thought Triss, looking at Assire and Fringilla.
Like sphinxes.
But it is clear that they are masking something.
Curious, I wonder what it is? Are they surprised because they did not know Emhyr was trying to kidnap her to Nilfgaard? Or is it that they have known everything for a long time, maybe even more than we do? Yennefer will speak in a moment about her arrival at Thanedd with Ciri, about what was said in the prophetic trance, which caused such a fuss.
Of the bloody struggle in Garstang, which resulted in Geralt being mutilated and Ciri being kidnapped.
Then the pretending will come to an end, thought Triss, the mask will drop.
Everyone knows that the affair on Thanedd was Nilfgaard's doing.
And when all eyes are turned to you, Nilfgaardians, there will be no other way, you will have to talk.
And then clarify some issues, then I too can find out more.
How Yennefer disappeared from Thanedd, why she has suddenly appeared her in Montecalvo, along with Francesca.
And who is and what role does Ida Emean, Aen Saevherne from the Blue Mountains play.
Why do I have the feeling that Philippa Eilhart is saying less than she knows, but declares her devotion and loyalty to magic, and not Dijkstra, who she constantly exchanges correspondence.
And maybe I'll finally learn who Ciri really is.
Cirilla, Queen of the North to them, but to me an ash-haired little girl from Kaer Morhen, who I remember as a younger sister.
*** Fringilla Vigo had heard a bit about witcher, professional individuals who were accustomed to killing monsters and beasts.
She attentively listened to Yennefer's story, listened to the sound of her voice, watching her face.
She was not fooled.
A strong emotional bond between Yennefer and Ciri was evident.
Equally obvious, however, was the relationship between the sorceress and the witcher.
Fringilla began to reflect, but raised voices disturbed her thoughts.
She had already guessed that some of those collected here were in opposite camps during the Thanedd rebellion; she was not surprised, therefore, when the antipathies came to the table in the form of remarks aimed at Yennefer.
It looked as if a quarrel was to break out, which was prevented by Philippa Eilhart who unceremoniously banged her open palm onto the top of the table until the cups and goblets rang.
'Enough!' she shouted.
'Shut up, Sabrina! Do not let them provoke you, Francesca! Enough about Thanedd and Garstang.
That is history!' History, Fringilla thought, with mixed feelings.
But history, which they helped to create, albeit from opposite camps.
They had expected it.
They knew what they were doing and why.
And we, the Imperial Sorceresses, we know nothing.
In fact, we are like girls on errands, she thought, they know that they are sent, but do not know why.
Well, she thought, because of it occurring it has created this Lodge.
The devil knows how it will end, but it is to begin.
'Continue, Yennefer.' Philippa said.
'I have nothing more to say.' The black-haired sorceress pursed her lips.
'I repeat, it was Tissaia de Vries who ordered me to bring Ciri to Garstang.' 'It is easier to blame everything on the dead.' Sabrina Glevissig snorted, but Philippa silenced her with a sudden gesture.
'I did not want to interfere in what was happening in Aretuza,' said Yennefer, pale and clearly upset.
'I wanted to take Ciri and escape from Thanedd.
But Tissaia convinced me that the appearance of the girl at Garstang would be a shock to many and her brought before them in a trance speaking prophesy would avert the conflict.
I cast no blame on her, because I thought the same.
The two of us make a mistake.
But mine was bigger.
If I had left Ciri in Rita's care...' 'What has happened can not be undone.' Philippa interrupted.
'Mistakes can happened to anyone.
Even Tissaia de Vries.
When did Tissaia first see Ciri?' 'Three days before the convention,' said Margarita Laux-Antille, 'in Gors Velen.
I met her there too.
And as soon as I saw her, I immediately knew she was an extraordinary woman!' 'Extremely extraordinary,' said Ida Emean aep Sivney who had so far been silent.
'Because of her extraordinary legacy because of her blood.
Hen Ichaer, Elder Blood.
The genetic material of extraordinary abilities for its wielder.
Predestined for the great role to be met.
Which must be met.' 'Why must you tell us elven legends, myths and prophecies?' Sabrina Glevissig said with a sneer.
'The whole thing smelt like fairy tales and fantasy from the very beginning! No I have no doubt.
Ladies, I suggest, as usually, that we address something serious, rational and real.' 'I bow my head before the sober rationality, which is a source of great strength and advantage of your race.' Ida Emean smiled slightly.
'However, here, among those capable of making use of the power, which is not always subjected to rational analysis and explanation, it seems somewhat inappropriate to disregard elven prophecies.
Our race is not so rational and draws its strength from other sources.
And yet we have existed for tens of thousands of years.' 'The genetic material called Elder Blood, of which we speak, turned out to be less resistant.' Sile de Tansarville noted.
'Even the elven legends and prophecies, which I do not underestimate, consider the Elder Blood to be total destroyed, extinct.
Is that not so, Lady Ida? There is no longer Elder Blood in this world.
The last, was in the veins of Lara Dorren aep Shiadhal.
We all know the legend of Lara Dorren and Cregennan of Lod.' 'Not all of us' Assire car Anahid said, speaking for the first time.
'I studied your mythology and I do not know this legend.' 'It is not a legend,' said Philippa Eilhart.
'It is a true story.
Also among us is someone who knows not only the story of Lara and Cregennan, but also its consequences and these would also be very interesting for us all.
We ask you to speak, Francesca.' 'From what you say,' the Queen of the Elves said smiling, 'you know the story about as well as I.' 'I do not deny it.
But I beg you to tell us.' 'To prove my sincerity and loyalty to the Lodge,' Enid an Gleanna nodded.
'I will.
I ask you ladies to take a comfortable position, because this story will not be short.' *** 'The story of Lara and Cregennan is a true story but so overgrown with fabulous ornaments it is hardly recognizable.
There are huge differences between the human and elven versions of the legend, in both, resonate chauvinism and racial hatred.
Therefore, I will cast off the ornaments and confine myself o the dry facts.
And yes, Cregennan of Lod was a sorcerer.
Lara Dorren aep Shiadhal was an elven sorceress, Aen Saevherne, one of the Knowing mysterious even to us elves, they carried Hen Ichaer, the Elder Blood.
The friendship and then the loving bond between them was first greeted with joy by both races, however, soon enemy opponents spoke against the connection of human and elven magic.
Among the elves and among the humans were those who considered it treason.
There were also problems, obscure now, about person feuds, jealousy and envy.
In short: as a result of the intrigue, Cregennan was killed.
Lara Dorren, hunted and prosecuted, died of exhaustion in the wilderness, while birthing a daughter.
The child was saved miraculously.
Then sheltered by Cerro, Queen of Redania...' 'Terrified by the curse Lara gave her, because she refused to help and left her in the cold to freeze,' Keira Metz burst into the narrative.
'If she didn't take the child, a terrible disaster would befall her and her family...' 'These are the fabulous ornament, of which Francesca gave up.' Philippa interrupted.
'Keep to the facts.' 'The gift of prophecy to the Knowing from the Elder Blood is fact.' Ida Emean said, looking at Philippa.
'And the repetition in all versions of the legend, suggests the theme of prophecy provides food for thought.' 'In the past they did,' said Francesca.
'The rumours of Lara's curse were not silenced and were even remembered seventeen years later, when the girl who Cerro had sheltered, called Riannon, grew into a girl whose beauty overshadowed even the legendary beauty of her mother.
The adopted Riannon bore the official title of Redania's princess and many ruling families were interested in her.
When among the many competitors Riannon finally choose Goidemar, the young king of Temeria, the marriage was almost destroyed by gossip about a curse.
However, the rumours did not reach their true strength until three years after the wedding of Goidemar and Riannon.
During the rebellion of Falka.' Fringilla who had never heard of either Falka nor of her rebellion, raised her eyebrows.
Francesca noticed it.
'For the kingdom of the North,' she explained, 'it was a tragic and bloody event, still vivid in memory, although it took place more than a hundred years ago.
In Nilfgaard, which at that time the North had almost no contact, the matter was probably not known, so let me briefly recall some of the facts.
Falka was the daughter of Vridank king of Redania.
His first marriage fell apart, when his eye caught the beautiful Cerro, the same who later took in Lara's baby.
There are preserved documents that describe the lengthy and intricate grounds for divorce, but it also contains a telling portrait of Vridank's first wife, a noble of Kovir undoubtedly a half-elf, but with a strong dominance of human characteristics.
Her hair was wild, her mouth like a lizards and her eyes were crazy and fanatic.
In short: Ugly, her sent her back to Kovir with a daughter, Falka.
And soon forgot about both of them.' 'Falka,' Enid an Gleanna said after a while, 'reminded him after twenty-five years, stirring up a rebellion and murdering with her own hands, her father, Cerro and her two half-brothers.
The armed rebellion broke out at the beginning against Kovir, Temeria and the nobility, as a firstborn daughters fight for her heritage.
But it soon evolved into a peasant war of enormous scope.
Both parties participated in gruesome atrocities.
Falka passed into legend as a bloodthirsty demon, although it is likely that she simply was unable to control the situation and still new slogans where printed onto the insurgents banners.
Death to kings, death to wizards, death to priests, nobles, the rich and lords, soon death to everything that is alive, because there was no way to contain the rebels drunk with blood.
The rebellion began to spread to other countries...' 'Nilfgaardian historians have written about it.' Sabrina Glevissig interrupted with distinct irony.
'As Lady Assire and Lady Vigo have undoubtedly read.
Shorten it, Francesca.
Skip to Riannon and the triplets of Houtborg.' 'All right.
Riannon, the daughter of Lara Dorren who was raised by Cerro the now wife of Goidemar the king of Temeria, was accidently captured by the rebel Falka and imprisoned in the castle of Houtborg.
At the time of her capture she was pregnant.
The castle defended itself long after the suppression of the rebellion and the loss of Falka, but Goidemar finally took it by storm and freed his wife.
Along with her came three children, two girls and a boy.
Riannon had gone mad.
Goidemar, full of rage, subjected the other prisoners to torture and from the snippets of testimony hear through their howls, he arranged a clear picture of the events.' 'Falka, who took after the beauty of her elven grandmother rather than her mother, generously bestowed her charms to all the nobles, knights, captains and sergeants, ensuring their loyalty and fidelity.
Finally she became pregnant and gave birth to a child, just at the same time that Riannon, imprisoned in Houtborg, gave birth to twins.
Falka ordered to give her baby to Riannon.
She reportedly said that only queens were worthy of the honour of being a wet-nurse to her bastards, and the same fate awaited all the crowned females of her new order that she, Falka, would build after her victory.' 'The problem was nobody, including Riannon, knew which of the three children, was Falka's.
It was alleged with a high degree of probability that it was one of the girls, apparently because Riannon gave birth to a boy and a girl.
Again, supposedly, despite the boastful declaration of Falka's her child was being nursed by an ordinary peasant wet nurse.
Riannon when finally cured of her madness remembered almost nothing.
Yes, giving birth.
Yes, at sometime they brought triplets to her bed to show her.
But nothing more.' 'At that time wizards were summoned to examine the three of them and determine who was who.
Goidemar was so furious that once they had discovered Falka's bastard he had intentions of killing it publicly.
We could not let this happen.
After suppressing the uprising unspeakable savagery had been committed against the captured rebels, it was time to make it end.
The execution of a child less than two years old, can you imagine? It was then that the legend arose! It was already beginning to circulate, a rumour that Falka was born as a result of the curse of Lara Dorren, which was of course, nonsense: Falka was born before Lara had ever meet Cregennan.
But nobody wanted to count the years.
Pamphlets and nonsense documents had been written and published in secret, even at the Academy in Oxenfurt.
But I'll go back to the tests that Goidemar asked us...' 'Us?' Yennefer raised her head.
'Who is us?' 'Tissaia de Vries, Augusta Wagner, Leticia Charonneau and Hen Gedymdeith,' Francesca said calmly.
'Additionally, I joined this group.
I was a young sorceress, but a pure blood elf.
And my father... my biological father, for I was given up... He was a Knower.
I knew about the gene of the Elder Blood.' 'And this gene was found in Riannon, when you examined her and the king before you examined the children.' Sile de Tansarville said.
'And in two of the children which allowed you to reveal the gene lacking in Falka's bastard.
How did you save the child from the wrath of the king?' 'Very simply,' the elf smiled.
'We pretended we did not know.
We told the king that the case was not easy, we were still investigating, but that such investigations take time... A lot of time.
Goidemar, deep down, had a good and noble heart, he calmed down quickly and didn't urge us and soon the triplets had grown and ran about the palace, giving rise to joy to the royal couple and the whole court.
Amavet, Fiona and Adela were alike as three sparrows.
They were watched closely, constantly arising suspicions.
Fiona poured the contents of a pot out of a window straight onto the head of a Constable, he called out that she was the evil bastard and so lost his office.
Sometime later, Amavet smeared the stairs with grease and a lady of the court slipped in it, yelling something about cursed blood and was forced to say goodbye to the court.
The low born were greeted with the whip and ostracized, so everyone soon learned to hold their tongue.
Even a baron from a very old family, who Adela shot in the ass with a bow, was limited to...' 'We will not expand on the antics of the children,' Philippa Eilhart cut in.
'When did you finally tell Goidemar the truth?' 'He was never told.
He did not ask for it and that suited us.' 'But which of the children was the bastard of Falka? Did you know?' 'Of course, Adela.' 'Not Fiona?' 'No, Adela.
She died of the plague.
Devil's bastard, cursed blood, demonic daughter of Falka, during an outbreak, despite the protests of the king, was helping the priests in the hospital and saved the sick children of the castle, when she contracted it and died.
She was seventeen.
A year later her brother Amavet became entangled in an affair with the Countess Anna Kameny and was murdered by thugs hired by the Count.
That same year, Riannon died, desperate and overwhelmed by the death of her children whom she loved.
It was then that Goidemar called us again.
The last of the three triplets, Princess Fiona had caught the interest of Coram, king of Cintra.
He wanted a wife for his son, also called Coram, but knew of the rumours and would not marry his son if possible to Falka's bastard.
We assured them with our authority that Fiona was the legitimate daughter of the royal family.
I do not know if they believed us, however, they young prince found her to his tastes and the daughter of Riannon, ancestor of Ciri, became the queen on Cintra.' 'Bringing to the famous dynasty of Coram the gene that were following.' 'Fiona,' Enid an Gleanna said calmly, 'was not a carrier of the Elder Blood gene.
Which we have called the Lara gene.' 'How is that?' 'The carrier of the Lara gene was Amavet and our experiment continued.
Because Anna Kameny, whose husband had killed her lover, still in mourning gave birth to twins.
A boy and a girl.
The father was undoubtedly Amavet, because the girl was a carrier of the gene.
She was named Muriel.' 'Muriel, the Rogue Beauty?' Sile de Tansarville was amazed.
'That was much later.' Francesca smiled.
'To begin with it was Muriel the Fair.
Actually, she was a cute and sweet child.
When she was fourteen there was talk about her as Muriel Velvet Eyes.
More than one man had drowned in those eyes.
Eventually she married Robert Earl of Garramone.' 'And the boy?' 'Crispin.
He was not a carrier so we were not interested in him.
I believe he died in a war, he only had weapons and fighting on his mind.' 'Wait.' Sabrina said with a rapid motion of her hair.
'Muriel the Rogue Beauty's daughter was Adalia called the Fay...' 'That's right.' confirmed Francesca.
'An interesting person, Adalia.
A strong Source, perfect material for a sorceress.
Unfortunately she did not want to be a sorceress.
She preferred to be a queen.' 'And the gene?' asked Assire var Anahid.
'She carried it?' 'Interesting enough, no.' 'So I thought.' Assire nodded.
'The Lara gene can only be transmitted continuously through the female line.
If the carrier is male, the gene is lost after the second or third generation.' 'But then activates again.' Philippa Eilhart said.
'Adalia, who was lacking the gene, was at the end of the day the mother of Calanthe and Calanthe was the grandmother of Ciri who is a carrier of the Lara gene.' 'The first since Riannon.' Sile de Tansarville spoke suddenly.
'You made a mistake, Francesca.
There are two genes.
One, the right one, was latent and you overlooked it in Fiona, deceived by the clear and strong gene in Amavet.
But the one in Amavet was not the gene, but the activator.
Lady Assire is right.
The activator is transferred through the male line and in the case of Adalia, manifested so little that you didn't see it.
Adalia was the first daughter of the Rogue, the following children almost certainly had no trace of the activator.
The latent gene in Fiona was probably in her male descendants up to the third generation.
But it has not disappeared and I know why.' 'Bloody hell.' Yennefer hissed through her teeth.
'I'm lost,' said Sabrina Glevissig, 'in the jungle of all this genetic genealogy.' Francesca drew a platter of fruit closer to her, stretched out her hand and muttered a spell.
'I apologize for this fairground show of telekinesis,' she smiled, and ordered a red apple to rise from the table.
'But with the help of this levitating fruit it will be easier for me to clarify everything.
This red apple is the gene for Lara, the Elder Blood.
The green apple represents the latent gene.
The pomegranate is a pseudo gene, the activator.
Let us begin.
This is Riannon, the red apple.
Her son, Amavet, the pomegranate.
Amavet's daughter, Muriel the Rogue Beauty and her daughter Adalia are pomegranates also, the last in the decline.
And here is the second line with Fiona, Riannon's daughter as the green apple.
Her son, Corbett, king of Cintra, green.
The son of Corbett and Elen of Kaedwen, Dagorad, green.
Have you notice, in the two successive generations of males descendants only, the gene is lost, it is too weak.
But now, there is a connection with the pomegranate and the green apple, Adalia, Princess of Maribor and Dagorad, king of Cintra.
And the daughter of these two is Calanthe.
A red apple.
A resurgent of the strong Lara gene.' 'The gene from Fiona,' Margarita Laux-Antille nodded, 'met with the activator of Amavet's through marital incest.
No one took notice of the kinship? None of the royal heralds and chroniclers paid any attention to the open incest?' 'It was not so open.
Anna Kameny did not broadcast that her twins were bastards, because her husband's family would have then stripped her and the children of their coat of arms, titles and possessions.
Of course various rumours stubbornly hovered around and not only among the commoners.
Calanthe, tainted by incest, had to find a husband in far off Ebbing, where the rumours had not arrived.' 'Add to your Pyramid, two red apples, Enid,' said Margarita.
'Now, according to the accurate observation of Lady Assire, the resurrected Lara gene goes smoothly through the female line.' 'Yes.
This is Pavetta, the daughter of Calanthe.
And Pavetta's daughter, Cirilla.
The only one at this time who is heiress to the Elder Blood, the Lara gene carrier.' 'The only one?' Sile de Tansarville asked sharply.
'You are very sure of yourself, Enid.' 'What do you mean?' Sile rose suddenly, extended her fingers covered with rings in the direction of the fruit platter and levitated the rest of the fruit, destroying and transforming Francesca's whole scheme into a multi-coloured mess.
'This is what I mean,' she said coldly, pointed to the chaos of the fruit.
'For these are the possible genetic combinations.
And we know only what we see here.
That is, nothing.
Your mistake has been avenged, Francesca, by producing an avalanche of mistakes.
The gene appeared by chance, after a hundred years, during which events may have occurred, of which we have no knowledge.
Events kept secret, hidden, covered up.
Children of premarital, extramarital, secret adoption, even swapped.
Incest.
Crossbreeding, the blood of forgotten ancestors which then revives in later generations.
To conclude: a hundred years ago you had the gene in your hand and it escaped you.
Mistake, Enid, mistake, mistake! Too much spontaneity, too many accidents.
Too little control, too little interference with chance.' 'We were not,' Enid an Gleanna, pursed her lips, 'dealing with rabbits, which can be locked in a cage and their parks chosen for them.' Fringilla, following the gaze of Triss Merigold, saw Yennefer's hands clench suddenly the carved arms of her chair.
*** This is what now unites Yennefer and Francesca, Triss thought feverishly, still avoiding eye contact.
The calculation.
Because, what they did had something to do with parks and breeding rabbits.
Yes, their plans for Ciri and Kovir's king, although seemingly unlikely, are completely real.
They have already done this.
They place who they want on the thrones, they create links and dynasties as they wished, as it is more convenient for them.
The used charms, potions and aphrodisiacs.
The kings and queens enter into foreign marriages, often morganatic, against any plan, intentions and treaties.
And then those who want children and should not are administered secret measures to prevent pregnancy.
Those who did not want to have children, but it was necessary to do so are instead or the promised cured were given placebos, water with licorice.
Hence, all these incredible connections.
Calanthe, Pavetta...
Ciri.
Yennefer was involved in it.
And now regrets it.
And she is right.
Heck, if Geralt finds out about it...
*** Sphinxes, thought Fringilla Vigo.
Sphinxes carved into the arms of the seats.
Yes, it should be the sign and emblem of the Lodge.
Knowledge, secrecy, silence.
They are sphinxes.
They can easily reach what they want.
It is a piece of cake to them, marry Kovir with Ciri.
They have the power.
They have the knowledge.
They have the means.
The diamond necklace on Sabrina Glevissig's neck is perhaps worth almost as much as the entire balance of payments for the forested and rocky Kaedwen.
Easily they can achieve what they plan.
But here is one obstacle...
*** Aha, thought Triss Merigold, we finally begin to talk about what we started to.
The sobering fact that Ciri is in Nilfgaard under Emhyr var Emreis's power.
Far from the plans that are being established here...
'There is no question,' said Philippa, 'that Emhyr has hunted Cirilla for a long time.
Everyone thought that it was for a political marriage with Cintra and the seizure of a fief, which is the legal legacy of the girl.
But we can not exclude the possibility that this was not about politics, but the Elder Blood gene, which Emhyr wants to introduce into the imperial line.
If Emhyr knows that we want to fulfil the prophecy he may wish for the future Queen of the World to be born in Nilfgaard.' 'A correction,' Sabrina Glevissig interjected.
'This is not what Emhyr wants, but Nilfgaard's sorcerers.
Only they could track down the gene and Emhyr has realized its importance.
The present Nilfgaardian ladies here probably want to confirm and clarify their role in the plot.' 'It amazes me,' Fringilla said firmly, 'the tendency of women to find intrigue in distant Nilfgaard, while the indicators suggest looking for conspirators and traitors closer to home.' 'An observation as straightforward as it is accurate.' Sile de Tansarville silenced Sabrina with a serious look, who was preparing to respond.
'All the evidence suggests that the information about the Elder Blood leaked to Nilfgaard was by us, all the conditions show this.
Have you forgotten about Vilgefortz, ladies?' 'I have not.' Sabrina's eyes burned for a moment with the fire of hatred.
'I have not forgotten!' 'The time will come for him,' Keira Metz teeth flashed ominously.
'But for now, this is not about him, but about Ciri and the Elder Blood which is so important to us, who is held by Emhyr var Emreis, Emperor of Nilfgaard.' 'The Emperor,' Assire said quietly, looking at Fringilla, 'has nothing in his hands.
The girl being held in Rowan is not a carrier of any extraordinary gene.
She is normal to commonplace.
Beyond all doubt she is not Cirilla of Cintra.
This is not the girl, whom the emperor sought.
Those who carry the gene, have it available even in their hair.
I examined her hairs and I found something I did not understand.
Now I get it.' 'So Ciri is not in Nilfgaard.' Yennefer said quietly.
'She is not there.' 'She is not there.' Philippa Eilhart confirmed seriously.
'Emhyr was cheated, someone slipped him a doppelganger.
I heard about this yesterday.
However, I am glad Assire's confession confirms this.
It confirms that our Lodge is already operational.' *** Yennefer had difficulties in mastering the tremors of her hands and lips.
Keep calm she told herself, calm, she repeated, calm, do not expose yourself, an opportunity awaits you.
Listen, listen and gather information.
Sphinx.
Be a Sphinx.
'This means that the culprit is Vilgefortz.' Sabrina banged her fist on the table.
'Not Emhyr but Vilgefortz, trickster, elegant scoundrel.
He tricked Emhyr and us!' Yennefer took calming breaths.
Assire var Anahid, who clearly felt uncomfortable in her tight dress, had just said something about a young nobleman from Nilfgaard.
Yennefer knew who she meant and unconsciously clenched her fists.
A black knight with wings on his helmet, the nightmare of Ciri's ravings... She felt the eyes of Francesca and Philippa on her.
Triss, however, whose gaze she was trying to attract, avoided her eyes.
Damn, thought Yennefer, with effort keeping an indifferent expression on her face.
What damn snare entangles this girl? Damn, how can I look in the witcher's eyes... 'There will therefore be a great opportunity,' Keira Metz cried excitedly 'to regain Ciri and also rip the skin from Vilgefortz, then set fire to the floor under the rogue's ass!' 'Burning the ground will be preceded by discovering Vilgefortz hideout,' Sile de Tansarville scoffed, who had never had much sympathy for Yennefer.
'And so far none have succeeded.
Even some of the ladies sitting at this table have spared their invaluable time and talents in the search.' 'We have already found two of Vilgefortz many hiding places.' Philippa Eilhart replied coolly.
'Dijkstra is extensively looking for more and I would not spurn his efforts.
Sometimes where magic fails turn to spies and informers for success.' *** One of the officers who accompanied Dijkstra took one look at the dungeon, fell abruptly, leaned on the wall and was as white as paper and gave the impression that at any moment he was going to faint.
Dijkstra noted in his memory that the officer be transferred to a desk job.
But upon looking in the cell, he immediately changed his mind.
His stomach jumped up to his throat.
He could not, however, show weakness in front of his subordinates.
Without haste he pulled out a perfumed handkerchief and put it against his nose and mouth, and bent over the naked bodies lying on the stone floor.
'The abdomen and uterus are sliced open.' He diagnosed, striving for peace and a cold tone.
'Very expertly, a surgeon's hand.
The girl has had the foetus removed.
When this was done, she was alive.
But it was not done here.
Are all of them in a similar state? Lennep, I'm talking to you.' 'No...' the agent shook, dropping his gaze from the corpse.
'Others had their necks broken with a garrotte.
They were not pregnant... But an autopsy will be done...' 'How many were found in total?' 'In addition to this one here, four.
None could be identified.' 'Not true,' Dijkstra denied from behind the handkerchief.
'I've already managed to identify this one here.
This is Jolie, she is the youngest daughter of Count Lanier.
She disappeared without a trace a year ago.
I'll take a look at the others.' 'Fire has deformed some of them.' Lennep said.
'It will difficult to learn... But, Sir, besides that... We found...' 'Speak and stop stuttering.' 'In that pit,' the agent pointed to a hole that opened in the floor, 'there are bones... Lots of bones.
We have not had time to remove and examine them, but judging by the bones of the head, they are all young girls.
If we ask the magician they may be able to recognize them... I could then notify the parents who are still searching for their missing daughters...' 'Under no circumstances,' Dijkstra turned sharply, 'are you to breathe a word to anyone about what was found here.
No one.
And especially not magicians.
After what I have seen here, I have lost trust in them.
Lennep, have the upper levels been thoroughly investigated? Did you not find anything that could help us in our investigation?' 'Nothing, Sir.' Lennep bowed his head.
'As soon as the report reached us, we raced to the castle, driving the horses hard.
But we arrived too late.
Everything was burned.
The fire had a terrible force.
It must have been magic.
But here in the dungeon, The spell did not reach.
I don't know why...' 'I know.
The fire was not lit by Vilgefortz but by his handyman Rience or another sorcerer.
Vilgefortz would not make such a mistake; we would have left us with nothing but black soot on the walls.
Yes, he knows that fire purifies... It obliterates all traces.' 'Well, it is obliterated,' Lennep muttered.
'There isn't even any evidence that Vilgefortz was here at all...' 'Then fabricate the evidence.' Dijkstra removed the handkerchief from his face.
'Do I have to teach you how? I know Vilgefortz was here.
In the basement apart from the bodies, is there nothing left? What is behind those iron doors?' 'Allow me, Sir.' The agent picked up a torch.
'I'll show you.' There was no doubt that the magic fire that should have turned everything in the basement to ash, started right there in the spacious room behind the iron doors.
The error in the spell had disrupted the plan to a significant extent, but the fire had still been strong and violent.
The fire had charred the shelves occupying one wall and melted glassware turned everything into a stinking mass.
All that had remained intact in the room was a table and two chairs, one wooden, one steel, strangely shaped, embedded in the ground.
Strangely shaped, but leaving no doubt as to their purpose.
'It is constructed,' Lennep swallowed, indicating the chairs and the brackets attached to them, 'to keep... legs... open.
Very open.' 'Son of a bitch,' Dijkstra growled through clenched teeth.
'Damned, son of a bitch...' 'In the channel below the wooden chair,' continued the agent, 'there are traces of blood, faeces and urine.
The steel chair is brand new, probably never used.
I don't know what to think...' 'I do,' said Dijkstra.
'The steel chair was prepared for someone special.
Someone Vilgefortz suspected had special abilities.' *** 'I do not underestimate Dijkstra and his secret service,' said Sile de Tansarville.
'I know that finding Vilgefortz is a matter of time.
Aside from the personal motive of revenge, that seems to fascinate some of the ladies, I would note that it is not certain that Vilgefortz has Ciri.' 'If Vilgefortz does not have her, then who does? I was on the island, none of us, if I understand correctly, teleported.
Dijkstra does not have her nor any of the kings, we know this.
And in the ruins of the Tower of Gulls her body was not found.' 'Tor Lara,' Ida Emean said slowly, 'once concealed a very powerful portal.
Can we exclude that the girl left Thanedd through this portal?' Yennefer closed her eyes and dug her nails into the head of the sphinxes fastened to the armrests of her chair.
Keep calm, she thought, keep calm.
She felt the eyes of Margarita on her, but did not raise her head.
'If Ciri entered the portal of Tor Lara,' the rector of Aretuza's voice changed a little, 'I fear we can forget our plans and projects.
I am afraid that we will never see Ciri again.
The portal in the Tower of Gulls was destroyed.' 'What are we talking about?' Sabrina burst out.
'Because in order to enter the teleporter tower, to even view it, you have to use magic at the fourth level.
And in order to activate the portal would take the abilities of an arch mage! I don't know if Vilgefortz could do this, let alone a fifteen year old girl.
How can you assume something like that? Who do you think this girl is? What is so special about her?' *** 'Does it matter,' Stefan Skellen, called Kalous, coroner to the Emperor Emhyr var Emreis, stretched, 'what is so special about her, Mister Bonhart? Or if there is indeed anything special about her? I am interest to see.
I'll pay you a hundred florens.
If you so desire, check to see what it is, after killing her or before, as you prefer.
The price will not go up one way or the other, even if you do find something, I tell you solemnly and faithfully.' 'What if I bring her alive?' 'No.' The man called Bonhart, massive in size, but lean and bony like a skeleton, twisted his grey moustache.
The other hand rested on his sword at all times, as if to hide from Skellen the relief on the pommel.
'Should I bring you her head?' 'No.' Kalous grimaced.
'What would I do with her head? Have it preserved in honey?' 'As proof.' 'I trust your word.
You are famous, Bonhart.
Also reliable.' 'Thanks for the recognition.' The bounty hunter smiled.
Skellen had twenty armed men around the inn, but he still felt a cold shiver down his back at the sight of that smile.
'It should always be so, but I seldom encounter it.
The lords and barons of Varnhagen have me bring them the heads of all the Rats otherwise they do not pay.
If you do not need Falka's head then you won't mind if I add it to the others?' 'To further a second reward? What about professional ethics?' 'I, Sir Skellen,' Bonhart narrowed his eyes, 'I do not get paid for killing, but for the service I provide to customer.
And I provide that service to both you and Varnhagen.' 'Logical.' Kalous agreed.
'Do whatever you want.
When should I expect you to call on me for the reward?' 'Soon.' 'Does that mean...?' 'The Rats are headed along the bandit's trail, thinking to winter in the mountains.
I'll cut them off on the road.
Twenty days, no longer.' 'You are confident of their route?' 'They were at Fen Aspra, they plundered a convoy of two merchants there.
They travelled past Tyffi.
They spent one night in Druigh to dance at the Harvest festival.
They at last came to Loredo.
There, in Loredo, Falka killed a man.
They still talk about it there, with chattering teeth.
That is why I asked what you have against this Falka.' 'Maybe the same as you,' Stefan Skellen joked.
'No, sorry.
You, after all, do not accept money for killing, but for services rendered.
You are a true craftsman, Bonhart, an honest professional.
A professional like any other? You work for contracts? Do they pay enough for you to live? Huh?' The bounty hunter stared at him for a long time.
In the end the smile disappeared from Kalous's lips.
'Certainly,' he said, 'you have to live.
Some make a living by what they know.
Others do what they must.
At the end of the day, life smiles on a lucky few, unless you're a whore.
They pay me for a craft that I love truly and sincerely.' *** Yennefer greeted with relief, joy and hope the break for a snack and the wetting of dry throats, proposed by Philippa.
It became immediately clear that her hopes were going to be dashed.
Margarita m clearly wished to speak with her, Philippa quickly pulled her to the other end of the hall.
Triss Merigold, who approached her was accompanied by Francesca.
The elf monitored the conversation without embarrassment.
But Yennefer saw the anxiety in Triss's eyes and she was sure had the conversation had no witnesses it would have been full of useless pleas for help.
Triss no doubt had committed her whole soul to the Lodge already.
And no doubt sense that Yennefer's loyalty was still uncertain.
Triss tried to comfort her, to ensure her that Geralt was safe and was recovering in Brokilon with the dryads who were helping him back to health.
As always, talk of Geralt made her blush.
He must have accommodated her, Yennefer thought without malice.
She hasn't known anyone like him before.
She will not soon forget about him That's good.
She accepted the revelations with a shrug of indifference.
Not thrilled by the fact that neither Triss nor Francesca believed her indifference.
She wanted to be alone, she wanted to make them understand.
Understand.
She moved to the far end of the buffet and dedicated herself to the oysters.
She ate carefully, still feeling pain, the effects of the compression.
She was afraid to drink wine, she wasn't sure who she would react.
'Yennefer?' She turned around slowly.
Fringilla Vigo smiled slightly, looking at the small knife she clenched in her fist.
'I see and feel,' she said, 'that you would rather thrust that knife into me than the oysters.
Is there still enmity?' 'The Lodge,' Yennefer replied coolly, 'requires mutual loyalty.
Friendship is not mandatory.' 'It is not and nor should it be,' the Nilfgaardian sorceress looked around the room.
'Friendship is the result of a long process, or it is spontaneous.' 'The same is true of enmity.' Yennefer opened one of the oysters and swallowed the contents along with the sea water.
'Sometimes you see someone for a split second, just before they blind you, and you do not like them.' 'Oh, the issue of enmity is much more complicated.' Fringilla squinted.
'Let's say someone you do not recognise at top of a hill, smashes to pieces your friend, right before your eyes.
You do not know her, can not see her, but you do not like her.' 'It happens sometimes.' Yennefer shrugged.
'Fate plays with us in many ways.' 'Fate,' Fringilla said quietly, 'is a very unpredictable and mischievous child.
Friends sometimes turn their backs and the enemies become friends.
You can, for example, talk to them alone.
Nobody tries to disturb or interrupt you, nor hear you.
Everybody says that these two enemies can speak with each other.
They talk about nothing important.
They just turn to banalities, throwing jabs from time to time.' 'No doubt,' Yennefer nodded, 'so everyone thinks.
And they have it absolutely right.' 'It will then be convenient,' Fringilla did not dismiss her, 'that we are in such a circumstance as to raise a question, both important and unique.' 'And what question did you have in mind?' 'The question of the escape you are planning.' Yennefer, in the process of opening another oyster, almost sliced her finger.
She looked around furtively, then looked at the Nilfgaardian from behind lowered eyelashes.
Fringilla Vigo smiled slightly.
'Be so kind as to lend me your knife.
For the oysters.
Your oysters are delicious.
In the south, they are not easy to get.
Especially now, in these conditions with the war blockade...
The blockades are a terrible thing.
Agreed?' Yennefer coughed softly.
'I noticed,' Fringilla swallowed an oyster, then reached for another one, 'Yes, Philippa is watching us.
Assire too.
Assire is probably afraid for my loyalty to the Lodge.
My loyalty threatened.
She is considering whether I might succumb to compassion.
Hmm...
Your imprisoned...
Perhaps the threat of death? Or maybe she is simply being used as a card in a game of gamblers? Believe me, I would not last here.
I would run away immediately.
Please, take the knife.
I've had enough oysters, I have to watch my waistline.' 'A blockade, as you say,' Yennefer whispered, staring into the green eyes of the enchantress from Nilfgaard, 'is a terrible thing.
Disgusting even.
You are not allowed to do what you want to do.
But a blockade can be overcome if you have...
the right means.
I do not have them.' 'You are counting on me to give them to you?' the Nilfgaardian enchantress studied the oyster in her hand.
'Oh, this is not an option.
I am loyal to the Lodge and the Lodge, it is obvious does not want you hurrying away to try and save you loved ones.
In addition, I am your enemy, how could you forget about that, Yennefer?' 'Certainly.
How could I?' 'A friend,' Fringilla said quietly, 'would warn that even with the components for a teleport spell, you'd fail to break the blockade unnoticed.
This operation requires time and is obvious.
Almost better would be an unobtrusive, natural attractor.
I repeat, almost.
Teleportation with an improvised attractor is certainly, as you well know, very risky.
A friend, would try to dissuade another friend from doing this.
But you're not a friend.' Fringilla tipped the shell in her hand and poured a little sea water on the table.
'Now let us finish this banal conversation,' she said.
'The Lodge requires loyalty.
Friendship, fortunately, is not mandatory.' *** 'She has teleported,' Francesca Findabair said coldly without emotion, once the turmoil caused by the disappearance of Yennefer had calmed down.
'There is no reason to break your heads, ladies.
We can not do anything now.
It was my mistake.
I suspected that the star of obsidian masked the casting of spells...' 'How did she do it, damn it?' Philippa screamed.
'A spell can be masked, it is not difficult.
But by what miracle could she open a portal? Montecalvo has a blockage!' 'I have never liked her,' Sile de Tansarville shrugged.
'Never did I approve of her lifestyle.
But I never questioned her abilities.' 'She will tell everything!' Sabrina Glevissig shouted.
'Everything about the Lodge! She will go right...' 'Nonsense,' Triss Merigold interrupted, looking at Francesca and Ida Emean.
'Yennefer will not betray us.
Nothing says that Yennefer fled in order to betray us.' 'Triss is right,' Margarita Laux-Antille supported, 'I know why she ran away, who she wants to save.
I saw them both, her and Ciri, together.
I understand everything.' 'And I don't understand anything!' Sabrina screamed out loud again.
Assire var Anahid leaned towards her friend.
'I will not ask why you did it,' she whispered.
'I will not ask you how you did it.
I will ask: where?' Fringilla Vigo smiled slightly, her fingers stroking the sphinx's head carved on the arm of her chair.
'How should I know,' she whispered, 'from which coastline the oysters originated?' Ithlina, in reality Ithlinne Aegli, daughter of Aevenien, the legendary elven healer, astrologist and diviner, famous for her predictions, divinations and prophesies of which the most famous remains Aen Ithlinnespeath, known as Ithlinne's Prophesy.
Indexed and transcribed many times in various forms, the prophesy enjoyed considerable popularity during a number of different periods; the comments, clues and explanations concerning it conveniently adapted themselves to the events of the time, reinforcing the general conviction of the existence of the great gift of second sight of Ithlina.
In particular, it is believed that Ithlina predicted the Nordling Wars (1239–1268), the Great Plagues (1268, 1272 and 1294), the bloody war of the Two Unicorns (1309–1318) and the Haak Invasion (1350).
It was equally believed that she predicted the climate changes observed beginning at the end of the 13th century (The White Frost), which popular superstitions always associated with the end of the word and the prophetic arrival The Destroyer (sic).
This fragment of Ithlina's prophecy was the trigger of the infamous Witch Hunts (1272–1276) and caused the deaths of numerous women and unfortunate girls, who were mistaken for the incarnation of The Destroyer.
Today, Ithlina is considered as a legendary figure by a number of researchers, and her "prophesies" as contemporary apocrypha cobbled together from bits and pieces, an ingenious literary fraud.
Effenberg and Talbot Encyclopaedia Maxima Mundi, Volume IX 

