Chapter Four 

The birds, as usual, proceeded the sunrise by filling the grey, misty morning silence with a veritable explosion of chirping.
As always, the first who were prepared to march were the women and children of Kernow.
Equally fast and energetic was the surgeon Emiel Regis, with a walking stick and a leather bag on his shoulder.
The rest of the company, who had enjoyed the evening with the distillery, where not so fresh.
The cold morning woke up and energized the revellers, but was not completely able to eliminate the effects of the mandrake moonshine.
Geralt woke up in a corner of the cabin with his head in Milva's lap.
Zoltan and Dandelion lay in a pile of roots, snoring so loudly that the bundles of herbs on the wall swayed.
Percival was found behind the cabin, curled up next to a small tree covered with cherries, lying on a straw mat, Regis used to clean muddy boots.
All five betrayed clear, although different symptoms of fatigue, as well as an intense desire to quench their thirst at the spring.
However, when the mist had been dispelled and the red ball of the sun blazed on the crown of the pines and larches of Fen Carn, the company was on its way, marching swiftly among the tombs.
Regis led, behind him followed Percival and Dandelion, singing a song about three sisters and an iron wolf.
Behind them stomped Zoltan Chivay, leading his chestnut stallion by the bridle.
The dwarf had found in the hut of the surgeon a gnarled piece of ash wood, which he was banging against the menhirs, as he passed he wished the long dead elves, eternal rest.
For his part, Field Marshal Duda, who sat on his shoulder, shouted from time to time, but his curses somehow seemed tired and unconvincing.
The least resistant to the effects of the mandrake proved to be Milva.
She marched with great difficulty, she was sweaty, pale and irritated like a wasp.
She did not respond to the chirpy girl with the braids she carried in her saddle.
Geralt thought it best not to make conversation, the more so because he also was not in a good humour.
The fog and the song being sung loudly about the iron wolf, masked the sounds of a group of peasants they came upon suddenly.
The peasants, meanwhile, had heard the company coming from afar and were waiting, standing motionless among the tombs that rose from the earth, their grey sackcloth clothing camouflaged them perfectly.
Zoltan almost stuck one with his stick, think they were a tombstone.
'Uh oh!' He shouted 'Sorry, neighbour! I didn't see you there.
Good morning! Hello!' A chorus of voices from ten gloomy eyed peasants mumbled a greeting.
The peasants wielded shovels, hoes and wooden pegs in their hands.
'I said Good morning.' repeated the dwarf.
'I guess you are from the Chotla camp.
Correct?' Instead of answering, one of the men pointed at Milva's horse.
'Black horse,' he muttered.
'Do you see?' 'Black horse,' said a second man, licking his lips.
'It will be useful to us.' 'Huh?' Zoltan saw the looks and gestures.
'A black horse, so what? It's a horse, not a giraffe, there are no surprises there.
What are you doing here, neighbours, in the cemetery?' 'And you?' the peasant cast a look of disgust at the company.
'What are you doing here?' 'We bought this land.' The dwarf looked him straight in the eye and tapped his stick on a menhir.
'I am measuring the steps, to make sure we were not cheated on acres.' 'And we are here hunting a vampire!' 'What?' 'A vampire.' The eldest of the peasant emphatically repeated, scratching his forehead under a dirty, stiff felt hat.
'Somewhere here he must have a lair, the demon.
We have ash stakes, which we'll pierce his heart with so he will never rise again.' 'I have holy water which has been blessed by a priest!' Another peasant cried eagerly, shaking the jar lightly.
'It will annihilate the bloodsucker forever!' 'Ha, ha.' Zoltan said with a smile.
'Hunting I see and well prepared as well.
A vampire, you say? Well you are in luck, we have a specialist in the company, of ghouls there...' He stopped in midsentence, because the witcher had strongly kicked him in the ankle.
'Who has seen the vampire?' Geralt asked, giving a stern look to his companions ordering them to be quiet.
'How did you know that it could be sought here?' The peasants whispered among themselves.
'No one has seen him,' the man in the felt hat, finally admitted, 'nor heard him.
How do we see him when he flies at night in the dark? How are we going to hear him when her flies with the wings of a bat without making a sound?' 'We have not seen the vampire,' said another peasant, 'but we have seen the traces of his work.
During the full moon of the last two nights the vampire has killed two people.
One female and one boy.
It was terrible! The unfortunate ones had been torn to pieces and all the blood from their veins drank.
So are we to wait idly for the third night?' 'Who said that the perpetrator is a vampire and not some other monster or predator? Whose idea was it to search the cemetery?' 'Our holy priest told us.
He is a learned and pious man, thanks to the gods that he came to our camp.
He immediately realized it was a vampire that assails us.
As punishment for having neglected our prayers and temple donations.
He is now at the camp praying and commanded us to seek the tomb where the dead one sleeps during the day.' 'And why here?' 'Where else would you find the tomb of a vampire if not in a cemetery? And this is after all an elven graveyard; every child knows that the elves are a vile and godless race, that one of every two elves is condemned to die again! All of this evil is because of the elves!' 'And the priests' Zoltan nodded seriously.
'True.
Ever child knows.
How far away is this camp of yours?' 'Oh, not far...' 'Do not give the location to them, father,' shouted a boy with shaggy hair and eyebrows, the same one who had shown his displeasure before.
'The devil knows who the hell they are, they could be a gang.
Let them give us the horse and then they can be on their way.' 'You speak the truth,' the old peasant said.
'We must finish the task, because time is running out.
Give us the horse.
The black one.
We need it to find the vampire.
Take down the child from the saddle, woman.' Milva, who during the entire conversation was staring impassively at the clouds, slowly looked down at the peasant, her features sharpened dangerously.
'Are you talking to me, pig?' 'Of course you.
Give us the black horse, we need it.' Milva wiped her sweaty neck and clenched her teeth.
The look in her tired eyes became that of a wolf.
'Where are you going, fellows?' The witcher smiled, trying to alleviate the escalating situation.
'Why do you need the horse, which you ask for so politely?' 'And how can we otherwise find the tomb of the vampire? Everyone knows that if you ride around the cemetery on the back of a black horse, when it stops in front of a grave and refused to move, that is where the vampire is.
Then we must dig it up and drive a stake through its heart.
We must have the black horse!' 'Could you not use another coloured horse?' Dandelion asked conciliatory, offering the reins of Pegasus to the peasant.
'We can not.' 'Then you are unlucky,' Milva said through clenched teeth, 'because I'm not giving up my horse.' 'Why will you not give it? Have you not been listening to what I said, woman? We must...' 'You do.
But it is not my business.' 'There is an amicable solution.' Regis said softly.
'As I understand, Miss Milva is averse to putting her horse into someone else's hands...' 'You can be sure of that.' The archer said, spitting loudly.
'I shudder at the thought.' 'So that the wolf and the sheep remain happy, healthy and serene,' the surgeon continued, 'I propose that Lady Milva rides the stallion and performs the necessary circuit of the necropolis.' 'I will not ride around the cemetery!' 'No one asked you, girl!' Cried the peasant with the hair in his eyes.
'We should just take the horse.
Women belong in the kitchen with the pots and stove.
Although a girl, may be useful after we draw the monster out, as the tears of a virgin when thrown on a vampire, burn like a firebrand.
But the woman must be clean and not touched by a man.
I can't see what benefit you'd be.' Milva took a step forward and swiftly threw her right fist.
There was a crunch, the boy's head flew back and his shaggy neck and chin became a perfect target.
She took another step and hit him in the throat with an open hand, reinforcing the momentum of the blow with a twist of her hips and shoulders.
The young man leaned back, tripped over his own feet and fell with an audible crack, striking the back of his head against a boulder.
'Now you can see what I'm worth.' The archer said, her voice trembling with rage, as she rubbed her fist.
'Whose the man now, and who belongs with the stove? There is nothing better than a fist fight.
The one still standing on their feet is the man and the one on the ground is the fool.
Am I right oaf?' The peasants hurried to agree, they stared at Milva with their mouths hanging open.
The peasant with the felt hat knelt down next to the young man and patted him on the cheek.
Without effect.
'Dead,' he moaned, looking up.
'He is dead.
What have you done, woman? You killed this man for nothing?' 'I did not mean to.' Milva whispered, dropping her hands and going pale.
Then she did something that nobody, absolutely nobody expected.
She turned, bent, leaning her forehead against a boulder and vomited violently.
*** 'What's wrong with him?' 'A slight concussion.' Regis replied, rising and tying his bag.
'His skull is thick.
He regained consciousness.
He can remember his name and what happened.
This is a good sign.
The lively emotions of Lady Milva did not, fortunately, have consequences.' The witcher looked at the archer, who was sitting next to them on rock, her eyes lost in the distance.
'She isn't a delicate lady susceptible to such emotions,' he muttered.
'I would blame the residue of the belladonna from yesterday.' 'She has vomited before.' Zoltan interjected quietly.
'The day before yesterday, at dawn.
Everyone was still asleep.
I think it was because of the mushrooms we got in Turlough.
I have also had a sore gut for two days ' Regis gave the witcher a strange look from under his greying eyebrows, smiled mysteriously and wrapped himself in his black cloak.
Geralt went to Milva and cleared his throat.
'How do you feel?' 'Miserable.
How is the boy?' 'He'll be fine.
He regained consciousness.
Regis, however, forbade him to get up.
The peasants are assembling a stretcher; we'll take him to camp between two horses.' 'Take my horse.' 'We are using Pegasus and a chestnut.
They are calmer.
Come on, it is time to be on our way.' *** The enlarged company now resembled a funeral procession, and move at the same rate.
'What do you think of their vampire?' Zoltan Chivay asked the witcher.
'Do you believe their story?' 'I have not seen the victims.
I can not say anything in advance.' 'It is obviously nonsense,' Dandelion said with conviction.
'The peasants said the victims had been torn apart.
Vampires don't do this; they bite into an artery and suck the blood, leaving behind two clear signs of fangs.
The victims often survive.
I read about it in a specialized book.
There were also engravings depicting vampire bites on the necks of virgin swans.
What do you think, Geralt?' 'What can I say? I've not seen these engravings.
I also don't know a lot of virgins.' 'Don't mock.
You've seen more than once the signs of a vampire bite.
Have you ever encountered a vampire that tears its victim to pieces?' 'No.
It doesn't happen.' 'Never, if we are dealing with higher vampires,' Emiel Regis joined the conversation.
'From what I understand, the victims of Alps, Katakan, Mula, Bruxa, Nosferat are not hurt terribly.
However, Fleders and Ekimma are quite brutal with their victims.' 'Well done,' Geralt looked at him with unfeigned admiration.
'You did not miss any kind of vampire.
And you have not mentioned any of the mythical ones, which only exist in fairy tales.
Truly, an impressive knowledge.
So you would know that Fleders and Ekimma do not live in this climate.' 'That's nice,' said Zoltan, waving his stick around.
'But what in our climate is capable of tearing a woman and man apart? Were they torn apart in a fit of rage?' 'The list of creatures that this could be attributed to is quite long.
It could be, for example a pack of feral dogs, plagues of which are quite common during times of war.
You can not imagine what these dogs are capable of.
Half of the victims attributed to chaotic monsters are actually on account of packs of stray mutts.' 'Exclude monsters then?' 'Of course not.
It could have been a striga, gravier, ghoul, harpies...' 'But not a vampire?' 'Probably not.' 'The peasants spoke of a priest,' Percival reminded them.
'Do priests know about vampires?' 'Some are versed in many things, often their opinions are worth hearing.
Unfortunately, not all of them.' 'Especially not those who roam the forests with refugees,' snorted the dwarf.
'More than likely it will be a superstitious fanatic from the forest.
He sent this expedition into your graveyard, Regis.
When collecting mandrake during the full moon, did you ever notice a vampire? Even a little one?' 'No, never.' The surgeon adopted a half-smile.
'And no wonder.
The vampire, as you heard, flies in the darkness on bat wings, without any noise.
It would be easy to miss.' 'And even easier to see where it is not and never has been,' confirmed Geralt.
'When I was younger, quite a few times I've wasted time and energy chasing illusion and superstition, that a whole village had described to me, including the mayor.
Once I stayed for two months in a castle threatened by a vampire.
There was no vampire.
But there was a good cook.' 'No doubt there were those cases.
However, where the vampire rumour was justified,' Regis said, without looking at the witcher.
'Then, I imagine, the time and energy was not used in vain.
The monster died from your sword?' 'Sometimes.' 'Either way,' said Zoltan, 'the peasants are in luck.
I intend to wait at the camp for Munro Bruys and the boys.
Nor could it hurt to rest.
And whatever killed the girl and the boy, better look out, because there will be a witcher in the camp.' 'And while we're at it,' Geralt pursed his lips, 'I'll ask you not to go around telling everyone who I am and my name.
This goes for you to, Dandelion.' 'As you wish.' The dwarf nodded.
'You have your reasons.
Well, you warned us just in time, because the camp is already in sight.' 'And in earshot,' Milva said, breaking a long silence.
'The clamour sounds like fear.' 'That sound you hear,' said Dandelion in an instructive tone, 'is the typical symphony of a refugee camp.
As usual, issued by the throats of hundreds of people, as well as cows, sheep and poultry.
The solo part is executed by nagging women, children fighting, the cock crowing and a donkey, which, if I'm not mistaken, someone has shoved a thistle under its tail.
The title of the symphony is: "The human community struggles to survive."' 'The symphony,' Regis said, turning up his arched nose, 'is usually acoustic-olfactory.
From the group of people fighting for survival arises the delightful smell of cabbage stew and vegetables, without which, it seems, they can not survive.
The distinctive accent of perfume also forms the effect of physiological needs, handled wherever they can, usually on the outskirts of the encampment.
I could never understand why the struggle for survival manifested a reluctance to dig latrines.' 'May you be swept away with the devil for all your clever chatter,' Milva said angrily.
'Instead of using fifty unintelligible words, use just three: Cabbage and shit.' 'Cabbage and shit always comes in pairs,' Percival Schuttenbach proclaimed a profound truth.
'One produces the other.
Perpetuum mobile.' *** Soon they had arrived in the bustling, stinking camp, between the fires, carts and sheds, they immediately became the center of interest to all of the refugees gathered here, which was a good two hundred, and perhaps even more.
The interest grew rapidly and in ways difficult to believe - suddenly someone shouted, suddenly someone screamed, suddenly someone jumped onto someone's neck, someone started laughing wildly and someone started sobbing.
Confusion arose.
From the cacophony of male, female and children's voices it was initially difficult to deduce what was happening, but soon the matter was clarified.
Two of the women from Kernow who had been traveling with them had found in the camp their husband and his brother, who they had thought had died or disappeared without a trace during the maelstrom of war.
The joy and tears were endless.
'Something as trivial and melodramatic,' Dandelion said with conviction, pointing his finger at the touching scene, 'can only happen in real life.
If I tried to finish one of my romances this way, I would be made fun of mercilessly.' 'Inevitably,' Zoltan confirmed.
'Although all are glad of something so banal.
It relieves us when destiny is favourable, instead of continually crushing.
Come, we've delivered the women.
In the end they finally got here.
Come on, there is no use standing here.' The witcher felt for a moment to propose that they wait for a bit, in case any of the women want to express their gratitude to the dwarves.
He abandoned it though, as there was no indication.
The women, exultant with their meeting had ceased to notice them at all.
'What are you waiting for?' Zoltan looked at him sharply.
'Until they shower you with flowers in thanks? Until they anoint you with honey? Let's go, there is nothing here for us.' 'You are undoubtedly right.' They had not gone far when a shrill little voice stopped them.
The girl with the freckles and braids caught up to them.
She was panting and in both hands she held a bouquet of wildflowers.
'Thank you,' she squeaked, 'for caring for me and my brother and mother.
You have been good to us and all that.
I picked some flowers for you.' 'Thank you.' said Zoltan Chivay seriously.
'You are good,' the little girl added, placing one flower in her pigtail.
'I do not believe what the old woman said.
You are not disgusting underground goblins.
You are not a white freak from hell, and you Uncle Dandelion, you're not a gaudy peacock.
The old woman lied.
And you Aunt Milva, you're no pervert with a bow, Aunt Milva, I like you.
For you I've picked the prettiest flowers.' 'Thank you.' said Milva with a sad voice.
'We all thank you.' Zoltan repeated.
'Hey, Percival, you disgusting underground goblin, give the child a present.
Something to remember us by.
Do you have in your pockets a worthless stone?' 'I have, here, young lady.
This is a beryllium aluminium silicate, commonly known as...' 'An emerald.' Finished the dwarf.
'Do not confuse the child, she will not remember anyway.' 'Oh lovely! Green! Thank you very, very much!' 'Take care.' 'And don't lose it.' Dandelion muttered.
'Because that stone is worth a much as a small farm.' 'Bah,' Zoltan said, planting on the bonnet of flowers he received from the girl.
'A stone is a stone, what else can you say.
Take care, girl.
Let us go, we can set up camp by the ford and wait for Munro Bruys, Yazon Varda and the others.
They should be along soon.
It is strange we have not seen them.
Damn, I forgot to take away the cards.
I bet they are sitting somewhere and playing cards!' 'We must get fodder for the horses,' Milva said.
'And drink.
Let's go down to the river.' 'Maybe we will be able to find some hot food.' Dandelion said.
'Percival, take a tour of the camp and make use of your nose.
We can eat where there are the best cooks.' To their surprise, the way to the river was fenced and guarded and those guarding the river demanded a penny per horse.
Zoltan and Milva began to get angry, but Geralt, not wanting any problems or the associated publicity, calmed them.
Surprisingly, it was Dandelion who dug up a few coins from the bottom of his pocket.
Percival Schuttenbach soon appeared, sullen and angry.
'Did you find something to eat?' The gnome blew his nose and wiped his fingers on the fleece of a sheep returning from the river.
'I found it.
I don't know whether we can afford it.
Here they want money for everything and the prices made me fall on my ass.
For flour and barley they ask a crown a pound.
A bowl of watery soup, two nobles.
A bowl of fish caught in the northern pike of Chotla which in Dillingen cost a pound ...' 'And feed for the horses?' 'One measure of oats, a thaler.' 'How much?' cried the dwarf.
'How much?' 'How much,' Milva growled.
'Just ask the horses how much.
If we leave them to eat grass, they will fall.
And on top of that there isn't any grass around here.
With the local circumstances there is nothing we can do.
We could haggle with the peasant selling the oats and have Dandelion give him the rest of his money.
Or from Zoltan and his parrot, he could receive a nasty stream of abuse, which, of course would do nothing.
Bu the horses are eager to get their heads in a bag of feed.' 'Bloody rip off!' Cried the dwarf, venting his anger with blows of his stick on the passing wheels of the carts.
'I wonder if we are allowed to breathe for free, or if he is charging for every breath.
Or for every shit!' 'You're not far from the truth,' said Regis.
'The satisfaction of physical needs also costs here.
Do you see that tent? The man who stands before it? He is marketing the charms of his daughter.
The price is negotiable.
A moment ago I saw a chicken and some tobacco accepted.' 'I predict a bad end for your race,' Zoltan said grimly.
'Every rational creature in this world, when they fall into poverty, misery and unhappiness, commonly join with their kinsmen, because among them it is easier to survive the bad times, because they help each other.
But among you humans, each of you looks at only how to make something out of misfortune.
If hungry, then food is not distributed, the weakest is devoured.
Such a procedure makes sense for wolves, allowing the individual to survive healthier and stronger.
But among intelligent races such selection usually allows the dominant and biggest bastards to survive.
Analyze this how you want.' Dandelion objected violently, and started to protest and bring forth cases of price gouging and utilitarianism by dwarves, but Zoltan and Percival drowned him out by imitating the sounds of a raspberry, which was considered by both races as a sign of contempt for the opponent's arguments in the dispute.
An end was put to the dispute by the sudden appearance of a group of peasants led by the famous vampire hunter, the old man in the felt hat.
'We are here about Clog.' said one of the peasants.
'We don't want to buy,' the dwarf and the gnome said in unison.
'Clog is the one who had his head smashed.' said a second man.
'We had the notion to marrying him off.' 'I have nothing against it,' Zoltan said angrily.
'I wish him happiness in his new way of life.
Health, happiness and prosperity.' 'And lots of small Clogs' Dandelion said.
'No, no, gentlemen,' said the peasant 'Do not laugh, how are supposed to marry him? After you knocked him in the head his mind is completely addled, he can not even distinguish between day and night.' 'Well, that doesn't sound so bad after all,' Milva said, looking at the ground.
'It seems to me that he is already better.
Definitely better than he was this morning.' 'I do not know what Clog was like this morning,' replied the peasant.
'But I saw him bowing before a shovel and say to the shovel that it was a pretty girl.
I don't want to talk about it anymore – pay the blood money.' 'What?' 'When a knight kills a peasant, he has to pay the blood money.
So the law now stands.' 'I am not a knight!' Milva screamed.
'That is the first,' supported Dandelion.
'Secondly, it was an accident.
Thirdly, Clog is still alive, so it can not therefore be a question of blood money, but of damages and compensation.
But, this is the fourth, we have no money.' 'So give us the horses.' 'Hey, Hey.' Milva's eyes narrowed ominously.
'Leave quickly peasant.
Take care where you pass.' 'Krrrrwa mother!' croaked Field Marshal Duda.
'Oh the bird has hit the nail on the head,' Zoltan drawled while patting the axe in his belt.
'Know this peasants that I do not have the best opinions about the mothers of individuals who think only about profit, even if it is earned from the broken head of a fellow traveller.
Get going, good people.
If you leave immediately, I promise that I will not chase you.' 'If you won't pay us, let us take this to a higher authority.' The dwarf gnashed his teeth and reached for his axe when Geralt grabbed him by the elbow.
'Peace.
Is this how you want to solve this problem? By killing them?" 'Why just kill them? It is easy enough to cripple.' 'Enough of this, dammit.' spat the witcher, turning to the peasant.
'Who is this higher authority that you mentioned?' 'Our elder Hector Laabs, Mayor of the village Breza.' 'Lead us to him.
We will somehow come to an agreement.' 'He is busy,' announced the peasant.
'Prosecuting a witch.
He is at the court hearing the people under the maple tree.
We caught a witch who was allied with the vampire.' 'Again with the vampire.' Dandelion spread his hands.
'Do you hear? Again with the same.
They dig up a cemetery, then catch a witch who is an accomplice to a vampire.
Countrymen, why not instead of plowing, harvesting and gathering you become witchers?' 'Do not make stupid jokes,' said the peasant.' There is nothing to laugh about.
We have a priest, and he is more reliable than a witcher.
The priest has ruled that the vampire keeps company and makes it dealings with the witch.
The witch summons the vampire and points it towards the victims.' 'It was so,' said the second peasant.
'The treacherous witch was hiding among us.
But the priest saw her use spells and now she will burn.' 'Of course,' the witcher muttered.
'Come on; let's take a look at this court of yours.
I will talk to your mayor about the unfortunate accident that Clog met with.
We will come up with some acceptable reparation.
Isn't that right, Percival? I bet you could still find a rock in one of your pockets.
Lead on, my good people.' The procession move in the direction of a spreading maple tree, under whose branches people gathered excitedly.
The witcher trailed behind a bit, trying to strike up a conversation with one of the peasants, who according to his face seems a somewhat honest man.
'Who is this witch, you have captured? Did she really practice black magic?' 'Oh, Sir,' muttered the peasant.
'I don't know.
This girl is a vagabond, a stranger.
And not altogether healthy in the head.
She is a grown up already, but will only play with little children.
She is also like a child, and says no ma, no pa.
But I do not understand those things.
The priest, and everyone, is saying that he did all kinds of witchcraft.' 'Everyone but the accused,' Regis said quietly, walking next to the witcher.
'I suppose when she was asked she said no ma, no pa.' There was no more time to make specific inquiries.
They passed through the crowd although not without the help of Zoltan and his ash stick.
On the wheel of a wagon loaded with sacks was tied a girl of no more than sixteen years, with arms wide apart, her toes barely touching the ground.
Her shirt had been torn from her emaciated arms, and used to bind her.
From the girl came a blend of mad giggling and sobbing.
Beside the wagon blaze a fire.
A blacksmith was fanning the flames with a bellow; another took a horseshoe in a pair of callipers and deposited it into the red-hot coals.
Above the din rose the excited cry of the priest.
'Vile witch! Godless woman! Confess the truth! Ha, look at her, countrymen; she is doped with some evil weed! Witchcraft is painted on her face!' The priest was thin; his face dark and dry as a smoked fish.
The black robe hung on him like a peg.
Around his neck gleamed a sacred symbol, Geralt could not recognize what deity, and didn't know much about them anyway.
Recently, the rapidly growing pantheon was of completely no interest to him.
It was likely the priest belong to one of the new religious sects.
These older sects dealt with more profitable activities and were less interested in chasing young girls, tying them to carts and inciting superstitious mobs against them.
'Since the beginning of time woman has been the seat of evil! The tool of Chaos, the partner in the conspiracy against the world and the male gender! A woman is ruled by carnal lust, Countrymen! Therefore, she readily serves demons to be able to satisfy her insatiable and unnatural lust!' 'Now we learn something fundamental about women,' murmured Regis.
'This is phobia, in its pure, clinical form.
Holy men often dream of vagina dentata.' 'I bet its worse,' Dandelion replied, also in a whisper.
'He probably daydreams all the time about a normal one, without teeth.
And the desire has risen to his brain.' 'And that deranged girl will pay for it.' 'Can we not find anyone,' growled Milva, 'who will stop this black fool?' Dandelion looked meaningfully and with hope towards the witcher but Geralt avoided his gaze.
'And who else but this female witch is to blame for our current troubles and misery?' The priest continued to shout.
'Why, it was none other than the witches of Thanedd Island who betrayed our kings, assassinating the King of Redania! Why, it is none other than the elven witch of Dol Blathanna who incites the Squirrels against us! You see now, what familiarity with witches has bought us! Tolerance of their filthy practices! Turning a blind eye to their arbitrariness, their insolent pride, their wealth! And who is to blame? The Kings! The self-satisfied leaders have renounced the gods, expelled the priests who held positions on their councils, and replaced them with witches who were awarded with honours and gold! And here is the result!' 'Aha! Herein lies the vampire.' Dandelion said.
'You're wrong Regis.
This is about politics, not vaginas.' 'And the money.' added Zoltan Chivay.
'Therefore I tell you!' shouted the priest his voice cracking.
'Before we are engulfed in war with Nilfgaard, clean out your home of this abomination! Burn this ulcer with white-hot iron! Let us cleanse with a baptism of fire! Do not let those who deal with spells live!' 'Do not allow it! To the stake with her!' The girl attached to the wagon laughed hysterically, rolling her eyes.
'Slowly, slowly,' said an, until now silent villager of enormous size, who was surrounded by a groups of silent men and women.
'We heard screams.
And everyone can scream, even a crow.
From you priest I expected greater respect than that of crows.' 'Do you deny my words, Mayor Laabs? The word of a priest?' 'I deny nothing,' spat the giant and adjusted his course pants.
'This girl is an orphan and a stray; she doesn't mean anything to me.
If she is in league with the vampire, take her and kill her.
But as long as I am mayor of this camp I will be here to punish the real offenders.
If you want to punish, then bring forward your proof of guilt.
' 'I will show you!' shouted the priest, giving a signal to his lackeys, the same ones who had recently been putting horseshoes into the fire.
'Before your eyes I'll show you.
To you, Laabs and to all those present!' The lackeys brought from behind the wagon and set on the ground a small cauldron.
'Here is the proof!' the priest yelled and kicked the cauldron, overturning it.
Onto the earth, poured a clear liquid, containing small pieces of carrots, green unrecognizable ribbons and a handful of small bones.
'The witch has been brewing magic potions! A witches elixir that enables them to fly in the air! To her vampire lover, to commune with him and concoct further vicious crimes! I am familiar with the ways and means of sorceresses; I know what this decoction was made with! The witch boiled a cat alive!' The crowd murmured with horror.
'How gruesome,' Dandelion shuddered.
'Boiling a living creature? I feel sorry for the girl, but this has gone a little too far...' 'Shut up,' Milva said.
'Here is the proof!' barked the priest as he lifted a small bone from the steaming pool.
'Here is irrefutable proof! The bone of a cat!' 'That is a bird bone,' said Zoltan Chivay serenely, rolling his eyes.
'A jay, I think, or a dove.
The maid was preparing a little broth, that's all.' 'Shut up, heathen midget!' shouted the priest.
'Do not blaspheme, or the gods will punish with the hands of devout people! This is a concoction of cat, I say!' 'From a cat! Definitely a cat!' shouted the surrounding peasants.
'The girl had a cat! A black cat! Everyone knows it was! It was always following her! And now where is the cat? It's gone! She must have cooked it!' 'She has cook it! Cooked it in her concoction!' 'Right! The witch has made cat soup!' 'No other evidence is needed! The fire for the witch! But first torture! Let her confess everything!' 'Rrrrwa mother!' Field Marshal Duda croaked.
'I'm sorry for the cat,' Percival suddenly spoke loudly, 'it was a beautiful beast.
Its skin shone like anthracite, the eyes were like beryl, the long whiskers and the tail, fat like a raccoon! A cat like a painting.
It must have been great at catching mice!' The peasants went silent.
'And how do you know, Sir Gnome?' grumbled one.
'How do you know what the cat looked like?' Percival Schuttenbach blew his nose and wiped his fingers onto his leg.
'Oh because it is there, sitting on the wagon.
Behind you.' The peasants turned around as if on cue, and murmured in chorus while looking at the cat, who sat on the bags loaded on the wagon.
Meanwhile, the cat, without regard for anyone lifted its rear leg and concentrated on licking its bum.
'Well, it has been shown,' rang the voice of Zoltan Chivay in the silence.
That your irrefutable proof is conclusively under the tail of a tomcat.
What's your second proof? Another cat? It would be nice if we had a couple.
We could breed them, and no rodent would be seen in a barn for half a mile away.' Several peasants snorted, others, including Hector Laabs, laughed heartily.
The priest turned purple.
'I'll remember you, blasphemer!' roared the priest, pointing a finger at the dwarf.
'Wicked kobold! Creature of darkness! Where'd you come from? Perhaps you are in collusion with the vampire? Wait, while we punish the witch, then we'll take you to the torture! But first we will judge the witch! We have already put the horseshoes into the coals; we'll see what she reveals when her ugly skin hisses! I assure you that she will admit her crimes of witchcraft, do they need more evidence than a guilty plea?' 'It depends,' said Hector Laabs.
'If you, priest, had hot horseshoes pressed to you, you would probably admit to fucking a mare.
Ugh! You say you're a man of God, but blast both races.' 'Yes, I am a man of God!' roared the priest, shouting over the swelling grumble of the peasants.
'I believe in divine justice, punishment and vengeance! And in God's court! The witch is brought before a trial of God, the judgement of God...' 'An excellent idea,' the withcer cut in loudly, leaving the crowd.
The priest looked at him with hate; the peasants stopped murmuring and stared open-mouthed.
'The judgement of God,' continued Geralt, in the absolute silence, 'is absolutely certain and fair.
The trials by ordeal are also accepted by the secular courts and have their own rules.
These rules provide that in the event of prosecution of a woman, child, old man or a person deprived of reason, there may be a defender.
Is this not true, Mayor Laabs? I wish to be her defender.
Delineate a field.
Those of you who are convinced of the guilt of the girl and have no fear of God's judgement.
Let him stand forth and fight me.' 'Ha!' cried the priest, his eyes still measuring him.
'Not very cunning, worthy stranger.
A challenge to a duel? Anyone can clearly see you are a scoundrel and a bully! With your sword, you want to pass the judgement of God?' 'If you do not like the sword,' said Zoltan, coming to stand next to Geralt, 'and if this fellow does not fit you, maybe I will be worthy? Come on let those who accuse the girl beat me with the axe.' 'Or me with the bow.' said Milva, squinting, also emerging from the crowd.
'One arrow at a hundred paces.' 'You see, people, how quickly they multiply to defend the witch?' shouted the priest, then turned and twisted his face into a sly smile.
'Well, scoundrels I accept the ordeal for your trio.
We will hold the judgement of God, to determine the guilt of the witch and to verify your virtue, at the same time! But not with swords, axes, spears or bows.
You say, you know the rules of the judgement of God? I know them too! There is a horseshoe in the white-hot coals! A Baptism of fire! Come, supporters of witchcraft! He who removes the horseshoe from the fire and brings it to me and does not show a trace of burns will prove that the witch is not guilty.
But if the judgement of God shows something else, then you die with her! I have spoken!' The murmurs of displeasure from Mayor Laabs and his group were drowned out by the shouts of those gathered by the priest, anticipating a great show and rejoicing.
Milva looked at Zoltan, Zoltan the witcher, the witcher at the sky, and then at Milva.
'Do you believe in gods?' He asked in a low voice.
'I believe,' said the archer quietly, staring intently at the embers in the fire.
'But do not expect they are bothered with hot horseshoes.' 'From the fire to the bastard is all of three steps.' Zoltan hissed through clenched teeth.
'Somehow I'll endure; I worked in a forge...
But pray for me to those gods of yours...' 'Wait a minute.' Emiel Regis, put his hand on the dwarf's shoulder.
'Please refrain from praying.' The surgeon approached the fire, respectfully bowed to the priest and to the audience and then without the slightest hesitation, reached his hand into the burning coals.
The crowd gasped in unison, Zoltan cursed.
Milva grasped Geralt's arm.
Regis straightened up, looked calmly at the horseshoe in his hand and without hurrying, approached the priest.
The priest stepped back, but crashed into the peasants who were behind him.
'This is what you wanted, if I'm not mistaken, Reverend?' Regis asked, holding up the horseshoe.
'A baptism of fire? If so, I suppose that God's verdict is unequivocal.
The girl is innocent.
Her defenders are innocent.
And I imagine that I myself am also innocent.' 'After...
after...
show me your hand...' the priest stuttered.
'It must be burned...' The surgeon smiled at him with pursed lips and them move the horseshoe to his left hand and demonstrated his right hand to the priest, which was quite healthy, then lifted it to show everybody.
The crowd roared.
'Whose is this horseshoe?' Regis said.
'Let the owner come pick it up.' No one answered.
'These are diabolical arts!' cried the priest.
'You're a witch or a devil incarnate!' Regis threw the shoe on the ground and turned around.
'Then perform an exorcism on me.' He suggested coldly.
'I'll allow it.
But the judgement of God has already taken place.
I understand that disparaging the results of an ordeal is an act of heresy.' 'Die, Begone!' shouted the priest, waving in front of the surgeon an amulet and performing other cabalistic hand gestures.
'Down to the infernal abyss, Devil! Let the earth below you part...' 'Enough of this!' Zoltan shouted angrily.
'Hey, people! Mayor Laabs, how long must we endure this madness? Do you think...' A piercing cry drowned out the voice of the dwarf.
'Niiiiiilfgaaaard!' 'Horses come from the west! Cavalry! Nilfgaard is coming! Save yourself, who can!' The encampment was turned into total pandemonium within an instant.
People rushed to their wagons and huts, jostling and falling all over each other.
All a deafening roar and din.
'Our horses!' Milva yelled, sending kicks and punches around her.
'Our horses, witcher! To me, quickly!' 'Geralt!' Dandelion screamed.
'Help!' The crowd parted, scattering like a wave in the surf, in the twinkling of an eye, it took Milva with it.
Geralt grabbed Dandelion by the collar but was not carried away because he managed to latch onto the wagon, which the girl accused of witchcraft was tied to.
The wagon jerked suddenly and moved from its place, the witcher and the poet crashed to the ground.
The girl shook her head and stared laughing hysterically.
The wagon slowly drifted away, the laughter was lost among the general roar.
'We'll be trampled!' Wailed Dandelion on the ground.
'Crushed! Auuauauu!' 'Rrrrwa mother!' croaked an invisible Field Marshal Duda.
Geralt raised his head, spat out the sand and saw a hilarious scene.
Only four people had not joined in the general panic, and one of which was against his will.
The latter was the priest, his neck stuck in an iron grip by the Mayor Hector Laabs.
The two other people were Zoltan and Percival.
The gnome with a quick movement pulled up the back of the priest's robe, the dwarf armed with pincers pulled from the fire a burning horseshoe and threw it down the pants of the priest.
Released from Laabs grip, the priest rushed forward like a comet with a smoking tail, and his screams were drowned in the roar of the crowd.
Geralt saw the mayor, gnome and dwarf go to congratulate each other for their success, when they fell straight into the next wave of the mob fleeing in panic.
Everything disappeared in clouds of dust, the witcher could see nothing more, He had no time to look anyway as he was busy saving Dandelion, who had been knocked over by a pig running blind.
When Geralt bent to lift the poet, someone knocked a ladder onto his back from a passing wagon.
The weight knocked him to the ground.
Before he could push the ladder off, fifteen people had run across it.
When he finally managed to free himself, a wagon overturned with a crash, three sacks of wheat flour, costing a crown a pound fell onto the witcher.
The sacks burst and the world was drowned it white clouds.
'Get up, Geralt!' yelled the troubadour.' Get up, damn it!' 'I can't,' gasped the witcher, blinded by the valuable flour and grabbing with both hands his knee which was immobilized with pain.
'Save yourself, Dandelion...' 'I won't leave you!' From the western edge of the camp they heard gruesome screams mixed with the sounds of galloping hooves and the neighing of horses.
The yelling and hoof beats intensified, metal struck metal it sounded like a pieces of iron colliding with a bell.
'A battle!' cried the poet.
'They're fighting!' 'Who? With who?' Geralt sought to clear his eyes blinded by the flour and sand.
Not far away, something began to burn; there was a breathtaking heat and a choking smoke cloud.
The rumble of hoof beats grew louder, the earth shuddered.
At firsthe saw a cloud of dust, then there were dozens of horse' fetlocks at a canter.
Everywhere around.
He overcame the pain.
'Under the wagon! Hide under the wagon, Dandelion, otherwise we'll be trampled!' 'Do not move...' whined the poet clamped to the earth.
'Let's stay in place...
I've heard that horses never step on a man lying on the...' 'I'm not sure,' Geralt gasped, 'if the horses have heard about this.
Under the wagon! Quick!' At that moment, one of the horses who did not know about proverbs kicked him in the head in passing.
The witcher's eyes suddenly lit up with red and gold of all the constellations in the firmament, and a moment later an impenetrable blackness covered the sky and the earth.
*** The Rats jumped up, awakened by a protracted scream whose rumbling echoes multiplied on the cave walls.
Asse and Reef took up their swords, Iskra cursed loudly, because her head hit a rocky protrusion.
'What is it?' Kayleigh screamed.
'What's happening?' The cave was dark, though outside the sun was shining.
The Rats rested after a night spent in the saddle fleeing pursuers.
Giselher put a torch into the fire, lit it up, stood up and approached the place where Ciri and Mistle slept together, as usual, away from the rest of the gang.
Ciri sat with her head bowed, Mistle covered it.
Giselher raised the torch.
The others also approached.
Mistle covered Ciri's bare shoulder with a fur.
'Listen, Mistle,' the leader of the Rats said seriously, 'I have never interfered into what you two do in bed.
I have never said a word of derision.
I always try to look the other way and ignore it.
It is your affair and your preference; I have nothing against yourselves while you are discreet and quiet.
But this time you've exaggerated a bit.' 'Do not be stupid,' Mistle broke in.
'What do you think, that... The girl was screaming in her sleep! It was a nightmare!' 'Did you scream, Falka?' Ciri nodded.
'Was it a terrible dream? What did you dream?' 'Leave her alone!' 'Shut up, Mistle.
Falka?' 'A person, someone I knew,' Ciri stammered, 'a horse kicked him.
Hooves... I could feel how it tore... I felt his pain... His head and knee... It still hurts me.
Forgive me.
I have awakened.' 'Do not apologize.' Giselher said with tight lips, looking at Mistle.
'You deserve the apology.
A dream? Well, anyone could have a dream.
Anyone.' Ciri closed her eyes.
She was not sure Giselher was right.
*** He was woken by a kick.
He was lying on his back with his head resting on the wheel of the overturned wagon, beside him, crouched Dandelion.
The man who had kicked him was wearing a round helmet and a jacket.
Beside him was another.
Both were hold the reins of horses, from their saddles hung spears and shields.
'The miller or the devil?' The other soldier shrugged.
Dandelion, Geralt saw, did not take his eyes off of the shields.
He too had long since noticed that on the shields were lilies.
The emblem of the Kingdom of Temeria.
The same sign was worn by other mounted soldiers that were swarming around.
Most were busy catching horses and looting corpses.
Corpses, which were mostly wearing black Nilfgaardian cloaks.
The encampment was a smoking ruin after the assault, but it appeared the peasants who survived did not flee too far.
Mounted soldiers with lilies on their shields pushed them to form groups, shouting at them.
Milva, Zoltan, Percival and Regis were nowhere to be seen.
Next to them sat the hero of the recent witch trial, the black cat, staring impassively at Geralt with golden eyes.
The witcher was somewhat surprised, usually cats did not like to be any proximity of him.
He did not have time to reflect on this unusual phenomenon as one of the soldiers hit him with a spear.
'Get up, both of you! Hey, this white one has a sword!' 'Drop the sword!' shouted the other soldier, calling over others.
'Drop the sword on the ground or I'll put a spear through you!' Geralt obeyed.
He felt a ringing in his head.
'Who the devil are you?' 'Travellers.' said Dandelion.
'Sure,' the soldier snorted.
'Travelling home? Fleeing? Have you shed your colours and defected from your units? Many in this camp are such travellers, they tasted military bread but Nilfgaard scared the shit out of them! Some are old friends of ours! From our squad!' 'And these traveller await another trip,' laughed the other soldier.
'A very short one! Up, on a branch!' 'We are not deserters!' cried the poet.
'It shows.
Listen to you lot.' From the circle of archers on horseback came a detachment of light cavalry led by some men dressed in heavy armor and helmets with proud plumes on them.
Dandelion looked at the approaching knights, wiped the flour from his clothes then spit into his hands and tousled his hair.
'You, Geralt, remain silent.' He warned.
'I will speak.
These are knights.
They have defeated Nilfgaard.
We haven't done anything.
I know how to talk when it comes to nobles.
We must show them that they are dealing with their peers and not common people.' 'Dandelion, for pity's sake...' 'Don't worry, everything will be fine.
I know the language when speaking with knights and nobles, half of Temeria knows me.
Hey, out of the way, lackey, move! I would speak with your masters!' The soldiers looked at him doubtfully, but raised their spears and reluctantly parted.
Dandelion and Geralt walked towards the knights.
The poet walked proudly and with lordly mien, little suited to somebody covered in flour.
'Halt!' shouted one of the knights.
'Not another step! Who the fuck are you?' 'And who am I to answer?' Dandelion said with his hands on his hips.
'And for what reason? Who are the noble lords who harass innocent travellers?' 'You are not the one asking questions, scoundrel! Answer!' The minstrel cocked his head and examined the coats of arms on the shields and mantles of the knights.
'Three red hearts on a field of gold.' He noted, 'this implies that you are an Aubry.
The head of the shield shows a lambel with three teeth and therefore you must be the firstborn son of Anzelm Aubry.
I know your father well, Sir Knight.
And you, Sir Knight, what do you bare on your coat of silver? A black column flanked by two griffins heads? The Paperbrock family coat of arms, if I'm not mistaken and in such matters I am rarely wrong.
The black column, so they say, reflects a savvy member of the family.' 'Shut up, dammit.' Geralt moaned.
'I'm the famous poet Dandelion!' boasted the bard, ignoring him.
'Surely, you've heard of me.
So lead me to your leader, your commander, because I'm used to talking to my equals!' The armoured horsemen were silent, but the expressions on their faces became increasingly less friendly and the fingers in their iron gauntlets gripped the reins tightly.
Dandelion, apparently did not notice.
'So what's with you?' he asked in astonishment.
'What are you looking at, Sir Knight? Yes, I'm talking to you, Sir Black column.
You should not make such a face.
Someone apparently advised that if you narrow your eyes and thrust your jaw forward, you'd look more masculine, dashing and threatening? That someone deceived you.
You look like someone who hasn't been able to take a shit for a week!' 'Take them!' shouted the eldest son of Anzelm Aubry, who carried the shield with three red hearts.
The knight with the black column of the Paperbrock family nudged his horse with his spurs.
'Take them! And tie up the bastards!' *** They walked behind the horses, dragged by ropes attached to their wrist and to the pommel of the saddles.
They walked, sometimes ran, because the riders did not take pity on the horses nor the prisoners.
Dandelion fell twice and was dragged on his stomach, screaming until they relented.
The soldiers helped him to his feet with their spears and ruthlessly drove them further.
Dust blinded their eyes, choked them and dug in their nose.
Thirst burned in their throats.
Only one thing comforted them – the road was heading south.
Geralt was finally moving in the right direction – and fairly quickly.
However, he did not rejoice.
He imagined the journey differently.
They arrived at a place at a time where Dandelion was horse from cursing mixed with cries for mercy, and the pain in Geralt's elbows and knees had become a veritable torture, severe enough to make the witcher begin to consider radical, though desperate action.
They reached a military camp, scattered around a half-burned and ruined fortress.
They were led past campfires and tents decorated with pennants of chivalry, surrounding a large bustling fairground by a huge, scorched palisade.
Upon seeing a trough for horses, Geralt and Dandelion pulled on their ropes.
The riders were not initially willing to let them go to the water, but the son of Anzelm Aubry was reminded of Dandelion's friendship with his father and took pity on them.
They pushed between the horses, drank and washed their faces with their tied hands.
A jerk on the ropes immediately returned them to reality.
'Who have you brought me this time?' asked a tall, thin knight in richly gilded armor, tapping the handle of an ornately decorated baton.
'Don't tell me it is more spies?' 'Spies or deserters,' confirmed the son of Anzelm Aubry.
'They were caught in the camp by the Chotla, when we repelled the attack by the Nilfgaardians.
They are very suspicious elements!' The knight in the gilded armor snorted, then examined Dandelion closely, his hard, yet still young face brightened suddenly.
'Nonsense.
Untie them.' 'But they are spies for Nilfgaard!' protested the black column knight from the family of Paperbrock.
'Especially that one, the rascal, who barks like a dog in town.
He says that he is a poet, the bastard!' 'And he didn't lie.' smiled the knight in the gilded armor.
'This is the bard Dandelion.
I know him.
Removed his bindings.
And the other one too.' 'Are you certain, Count?' 'It was an order, Knight Paperbrock.' 'And you didn't think that I might come in useful, right?' Dandelion muttered to Geralt, rubbing his numb wrist where they had been bound.
'So now you know.
My reputation precedes me, everywhere I am known and honoured.' Geralt made no comment as he was busy massaging his own wrists, sore knees and elbows.
'I beg you to forgive the zeal of these lads.' Said the knight, with the title of Count.
'They see Nilfgaardian spies everywhere.
Every patrol brings a few of those suspected of being spies.
That is, those who stand out among the refugees.
And you, noble Dandelion, stand out.
How did you get over the Chotla, among the refugees?' 'We were on our way to Maribor from Dillingen,' Dandelion invented, 'when we got into this mess, I and my friend, also... a poet.
Surely you know him, he is called Giraldus.' 'Of course I do, of course, I've read your poems, Sir Giraldus.' boasted the Count.
'It's an honour.
My name is Daniel Etcheverry, Count of Garramone.
On my honour, Master Dandelion, much has changed since you visited the court of king Foltest.' 'Undoubtedly, a lot.' 'Who would have thought,' the Count frowned, 'that this would happen.
Verden held by Emhyr, Brugge basically conquered, Sodden is again on fire... and we fall back, constantly fall back... I'm sorry, I meant: we perform a tactical maneuvre.
Nilfgaard burns and loots all around, they are already on their way to banks of the Ina and they besiege the fortresses of Razwan and Mayena.
And yet the army continues with these tactical maneuvers.' 'When I saw your lilies at the Chotla,' said Dandelion, 'I was convinced it was an offensive.' 'Just a counterattack.' Daniel Etcheverry corrected him.
'A surveying fight.
We crossed and destroyed some Nilfgaardian patrols and Scoia'tael commandos that were spreading fires.
What you see here is all that remains of the fortress of Ameria, when we conquered it back.
And the fortresses Carcano and Vidort have been burned to the foundations... The whole south is awash in blood, fire and smoke... Oh, I'm boring you, gentlemen.
You already know what's happening in Brugge and Sodden, you followed the refugees through there.
And my lads took you for spies! As an apology please accept an invitation to lunch.
Some of the gentlemen of the nobility will be happy to meet you, Sir Poets.' 'It is a true honour to us.' Geralt bowed, stiffly.
'But time flies.
We need to get under way.' 'But, please do not feel uneasy.' Daniel Etcheverry smiled.
'It is a simple soldier's meal.
Venison, hazel grouse, fruits, truffles...' 'To decline,' Dandelion swallowed and measured the witcher with a significant glance, 'would be a grave insult.
Let us go, my lord.
This is your tent, the blue and gold?' 'No.
That tent is the commander's.
Blue and gold are the colours of his homeland.' 'How is that?' Dandelion was amazed.
'I was sure this army was under your charge, Count.' 'This is a separate branch of the Termerian army.
I am the liaison officer of king Foltest, there are nobles here with me who are also fighting under the sign of Temeria.
But the foundations of his army are subjects from other kingdoms.
You see the banner before the command tent?' 'Lions.' Geralt stopped.
'Golden lions on a blue field.
That...
That is the emblem of...' 'Cintra.' confirmed the Count.
'These are exiles from the kingdom of Cintra, now occupied by Nilfgaard.
Marshal Vissegerd leads them.' Geralt turned to the Count and opened his mouth to say that an urgent matter would force them to nevertheless refuse the lunch invitation.
He did not make it.
He saw a group of officers approaching them, headed by a strong, thick, gray-haired knight in a blue cloak and gold chain armor.
'Here, Sir Poets, is the Marshal Vissegerd in person.' Daniel Etcheverry said.
'Allow me the honour of introducing...' 'There is no need.' Marshal Vissegerd interrupted hoarsely, his eyes drilling into Geralt.
'We have already been introduced.
In Cintra, at the court of Queen Calanthe.
At the engagement of Princess Pavetta.
It was fifteen years ago, but I have a good memory.
And you, bastard witcher, do you remember me?' 'I remember.' Geralt said and obediently let the soldiers bind his hands.
*** Daniel Etcheverry, Count of Garramone, tried to intercede for Geralt and Dandelion, when the soldier had settled them on chairs in the Marshal's tent.
When the soldiers left at Vissegerd's order, the Count resumed his efforts.
'This is the poet and troubadour Dandelion, Sir Marshal,' he explained.
'I know him.
He is known throughout the whole world.
It is not appropriate to do this to him.
On my honour, I guarantee that he is not a nilfgaardian spy.' 'Do not swear so hastily, Count.' said Vissegerd, not taking his eyes off the bound men.
'Perhaps he is a poet, but he was captured in the company of this miscreant witcher, I would not vouch for him.
It seems to me that you still don't realize what bird you have caught in your snares.' 'The witcher?' 'Of course, Geralt, who is called the White Wolf.
The same rogue who laid claim to the right of Cirilla, Pavetta's daughter, granddaughter of Calanthe, the same Ciri of who there is so much talk of now.
You are too young to remember those times, when the scandal was all that was talked about at the courts.
But I was an eye witness to those events.' 'And what binds him to the princess Cirilla?' 'That dog,' the Marshal pointed at Geralt, 'contributed to the marriage of Pavetta, daughter of Queen Calanthe, to Duny, an unknown stranger from the south.
From this shameful union was born Cirilla.
Even before her birth she was promised to that bastard witcher as payment for his help in conducting the marriage.
Have you heard of the Law of Surprise?' 'Not at all.
But keep talking, Marshal.' 'The witcher,' Vissegerd again pointed his finger at Geralt, 'after the death of Pavetta, wanted to take the girl, but Calanthe wouldn't allow it and threw him out.
But he waited for the right time.
When the war started with Nilfgaard and Cintra fell, he took advantage of the confusion and turmoil and kidnapped Ciri.
He kept the girl hidden, because he knew that we were seeking her.
And he eventually grew bored of her and sold her to Emhyr.' 'These are all lies and slander.' Dandelion bellowed.
'In all that there is not one word of truth!' 'Shut up or I'll gag you.
Combine the facts, Count.
The witcher had Cirilla, now Emhyr Emreis has her.
And the witcher is arrested mixed in with the vanguard of the Nilfgaardian patrol.
What does it mean?' Daniel Etcheverry shrugged.
'What does it mean?' Vissegerd repeated, leaning on Geralt.
'What, miscreant? Speak up! How long have you been spies for Nilfgaard?' 'I'm not a spy for anyone.' 'I will tear strips from you!' 'Do it.' 'Mister Dandelion,' the Count of Garramone said suddenly.
'It would be better for you if you explained.
The sooner the better.' 'That's what I've been waiting to do,' the poet exploded, 'but the lord Marshal threatened to gag me! We are innocent; it's all blatant fabrication and hideous slander.
Cirilla was kidnapped from Thanedd Island and Geralt was seriously wounded in her defence.
Anyone can confirm this.
Any wizard who was on Thanedd.
And the Redanian Chancellor, Count Sigismund Dijkstra...' Dandelion stopped suddenly, remembering that Dijkstra was completely unsuitable as a defence witness in this case, and invoking the wizards of Thanedd to improve their position was not a good idea either.
'It is also an absurdity,' he continued talking loudly and quickly, 'accusing Geralt of kidnapping Ciri from Cintra.
Geralt found the girl after the massacre of the city, wandering and hid her from others, Nilfgaard agents that were looking for her.
I myself was captured by these agents and subjected to torture, to confess where he had hidden Ciri! I did not say a word and these agents are now dead, they did not know with whom they had started with.' 'Your bravery,' said the Count 'was futile.
Emhyr finally has Cirilla.
As everyone knows he intends to marry her and make her the Empress of Nilfgaard.
For the time being he is hailing her as the Queen of Cintra and the surrounding area, which causes us many problems.' 'Emhyr,' declared the poet, 'could have sat on the throne of Cintra whenever he wanted.
Ciri, whether she takes it however, has the right to the throne.' 'The right?' Vissegerd roared, splashing Geralt with saliva.
'Shit, she has no right! Let Emhyr marry her if he wishes.
Let her give him children and he can give her grants and titles, according to his whim.
Queen of Cintra and the Skellige Islands, why not? Duchess of Brugge? The Countess of Sodden? Go ahead, we bow at the waist! And why, I humbly ask, not the Queen of the Sun and Moon? Her cursed and tainted blood has no right to the throne! Cursed blood, the whole female line of this family is cursed, vile creatures, beginning with Riannon! Ciri's great-grandmother, Adalia played the harlot with her cousin as her mother Muriel, fornicated with everyone! From this blood only incestuous whores are born.' 'Speak softly, Marshal.' Dandelion said cheekily.
'Before your tent hangs a banner with golden lions, and you are about to hail Ciri's grandmother, Calanthe, the Lioness of Cintra, for which most of your troops spilt blood for at Marnadal and Sodden as an amoral and adulterous bitch.
And then I wouldn't be so sure of the loyalty of your army.' Vissegerd covered the distance between him and Dandelion in two steps and grabbed him by the front of his shirt and lifted him from the chair.
The face of the Marshal which was a moment ago calm was now flushed a heraldic red.
Geralt started to strongly worry about the health of his friend, when suddenly an Adjutant rushed in and excitedly started announcing that urgent and important news had been brought back by a patrol.
Vissegerd released Dandelion, knocked over the chair and left.
'Uff...' groaned the poet, shaking his head and neck.
'That was close, he would have strangled me...
Can you loosen my bonds, Count?' 'No Sir Dandelion, I can not.' 'Are you going to give belief to such nonsense? That we are spies?' 'My belief has nothing to do with it.
You will remain bound.' 'Pity,' coughed Dandelion.
'What demon possessed the Marshal? He suddenly fell upon me like a hawk.' Daniel Etcheverry gave a crooked smile.
'When you mention the loyalty of his troops, Sir Poet, you unwittingly touched on a sore point.' 'What? What point?' 'The soldier wept when they heard the news of Ciri's death.
And then there was another story.
It turned out that the granddaughter of Calanthe was alive.
That she was in Nilfgaard and enjoyed the favour of Emperor Emhyr.
There were mass desertions.
These people had left home and family, had fled to Sodden and Brugge, to Temeria, because they wanted to fight for Cintra, the blood of Calanthe.
They wanted to fight for the liberation of their country, sought to expel the invaders from Cintra, to make sure the descendant of Calanthe regained the throne.
And what happens? Calanthe's blood returns to the throne of Cintra in honour and glory...' 'As a puppet in the hands of Emhyr who kidnapped her.' 'Emhyr wants to marry her.
He wants her to sit beside him on the imperial throne, to confirm the titles and vassalage.
Is this how the puppet acts? Cirilla was seen at the imperial court by ambassadors from Kovir.
They claim that she was not abducted by force.
Cirilla, the only heir to the throne of Cintra, came to the throne of Nilfgaard as an ally.
Such is the news that has spread among the soldiers.' 'Circulated by agents of Nilfgaard.' 'I know,' nodded the Count.
'But the soldiers do not.
When you cling to a deserter, you are punished by hanging, but I understand.
They want to fight for their own country, for their own homes.
For themselves, not for Temeria.
Under their own banner.
They can see here in the camp, the golden lion bows down before the lilies of Temeria.
Vissegerd had eight thousand soldiers, including five thousand native Cintrans, the rest were Temerian units and volunteer knights from Brugge and Sodden.
At this time the army has six thousand men.
Those who have deserted have been solely Cintrans.
Vissegerd's army was decimated without a fight.
Do you understand what it means to him?' 'He loses prestige and position.' 'Of course.
A few hundred desert and the king Foltest removes the baton.
Already, it is difficult to call this army Cintran.
Vissegerd thrashes about, wanting to stop the desertions, thus he is spreading the rumours of the uncertain origin of Princess Cirilla and her ancestors.' 'What of yourself, Count,' Geralt could not help it.
'You listen with clear distaste.' 'You have noticed?' Daniel Etcheverry smile slightly.
'Vissegerd knows about my lineage...
In short I am a relative to Ciri, Muriel Countess of Garramone, called the Fair, was Cirilla's great-grandmother and also my great-grandmother.
During family battles various legends of her romantic conquests were circulated, yet when some young upstart proclaims my ancestor was a whore, it fills me with disgust.
But I do not react.
Because I am a soldier.
Do you understand my lords?' 'Yes.' said Geralt.
'No.' said Dandelion.
'Vissegerd is the commander of this unit which is part of the Temerian army.
And Cirilla in the hands of Emhyr, is a threat to the unit and the army, and to my king and country.
I have no intention of denying rumours surrounding Vissegerd's slander and undermining the authority of his commanded.
I'm going to support him in proving that Cirilla is a bastard and has no rights to the throne.
I will not resist the Marshal, or his decisions and orders.
On the contrary, I will support him.' The witcher twisted his lips into a smile.
'You see Dandelion? The Count never for a moment took us for spies, otherwise we wouldn't have been granted such a thorough explanation.
The Count knows we are innocent.
But he will not lift a finger when Vissegerd issues a verdict on us.' 'Does this mean...
Does this mean...' The Count looked away.
'Vissegerd,' he said quietly, 'is furious.
You had bad luck falling into his hands.
Especially you, Sir Witcher.
I will try Mister Dandelion...' He was interrupted by the entrance of Vissegerd, still red and angry as a bull.
The Marshal approached the table, slammed his baton on it and deposited a map atop it, then turned to Geralt and drilled him with his eyes.
The withcer did not lower his eyes.
'A wounded Nilfgaardian, was caught by the patrol,' drawled Vissegerd, 'he managed to remove his bandages and bled out on the road rather than contribute to the defeat of his people.
We wanted to use him, but he slipped between our fingers and left us with nothing but blood.
A good lesson.
It is unfortunate that witchers do not teach such things to the children of kings who they are educating.' Geralt remained silent, but bowed his head.
'What, freak? Freak of nature.
Creature of Hell.
What did you teach Cirilla? What education did you give her? Everyone has seen it and knows it! That bastard lives, expanding the Nilfgaardian throne like its nothing! And when Emhyr takes her to bed, she will be willing, whore!' 'Displaying yourself in anger,' said Dandelion, 'is not worthy of a knight.
Sir Marshal, are you blaming everything on a child who was forcibly abducted in violence by Emhyr?' 'Even a child can resist violence! Knights have ways, even kings.
If she was really of royal blood, she would have found a way.
Scissors, a piece of broken glass, even an awl! The whore could have slit her wrists with her own teeth! Hung herself with a stocking!' 'I will hear no more, Vissegerd.' Geralt said quietly.
'I will hear no more.' The Marshal audibly gritted his teeth and bent.
'You will hear no more.' He said in a voice trembling with rage.
'This is fine because I have nothing more to say.
Just one thing.
Then, in Cintra, fifteen years ago, you talked a lot about destiny.
I thought then that it was nonsense.
But it was your destiny, witcher.
Since that night, your fate was sealed, inscribed in black runes among the stars.
Ciri, Pavetta's daughter is your destiny.
And your death.
For Cirilla, Pavetta's daughter, you'll hang!' The "7th Daerlan" brigade was available to the operation as a separate branch of the Fourth Army Cavalry.
We had just received support in the form of three companies of light cavalry, from Verden, which I gave to the Vreemde Battle Group.
The rest of the brigade was involved in the Aedirn campaign, which I divided into Battle Groups: "Sieuers" and "Morteisen", each consisting of four squadrons.
We left the assembly point at Drieschot in the evening with the Fourth on the fifth of August.
The order was for the Group was to reach the borders of Vidort, Carcano and Armeria, to capture the crossings of the Ina, destroying any enemy we encountered, but avoiding large points of resistance.
Starting fires, especially at night, would illuminate the path of the Fourth Army, creating panic among the civilian population and blocking all roads behind the lines of the enemy with fugitives.
Pretend to encircle and push the retreating enemy troops towards the direction of the actual boiler.
Eliminating selected groups of civilians and prisoners to awaken panic, fear and further break the morale of the enemy.
The tasks described here were carried out by the brigade with great soldier's sacrifice.
Elan Trahe For Emperor and homeland: The glorious trail of fire of the 7th Daerlan Cavalry Brigade 

